Seagull 203 camera

The Seagull 203 camera originated from Shanghai 203. Since products were not allowed to be named after the city, Shanghai 203 was changed to Seagull 203. Before Shanghai 203, there were relatively mature models such as Shanghai 201 and Shanghai 202. Therefore, the Seagull 203 is a relatively mature camera. This kind of camera, together with the Seagull 4A and 4B of the Shanghai Camera Factory, was the main force of the 120-type cameras in the Chinese camera industry at that time. It was produced in large quantities and was deeply loved by people. The Seagull double-lens reflex camera is an imitation of the Rollei camera, with a relatively high starting point, and the production was also high-quality and exquisite at that time. Of course, the lens is also very good, and it makes perfect sense to use it even today. The shutter and lens of the Seagull 203 have the same structure as the Seagull double reflex camera, but they are independently designed and cannot be interchanged. The biggest feature of Seagull 203 is that it can be folded and easily "downsized" into a palm-sized "iron block". It is not only easy to carry, but also very safe without fear of bumps and scratches. It is much lighter than the Seagull double reflex. It is a good complement to the Seagull dual-camera camera!

The earliest model of the Seagull 203, like the Shanghai 203, also had a large dial wheel. It was also exported in small quantities and placed in overseas Chinese stores. Later, it was changed to a small passing wheel for mass production. There is also a small batch that has the exposure meter removed from the fuselage, resulting in the bare 203-B and the "lamp holder type" 203 with a flash socket. The latest version of the Seagull 203 also embarked on the road of plasticization, with the plastic shell Seagull 203-1, 203-3, and 203-H. The changes are not too big, but because the output is not too large, the current collection value is higher.

Like Russian equipment, there are not many domestically produced 120 folding cameras. Among the few models, the "Qiyi" produced in Tianjin is the highest grade, but it has not formed a production scale. The Seaou 203 (or Shanghai 203) should be ranked second, because its large-scale production represents the highest level of domestic 120 folding machines. Although there was a lot of output back then, they were all sold in cities with relatively developed politics, economy, and industry such as Beijing, Shanghai, and Shenyang. They were also rare in some smaller and underdeveloped cities.

Because this kind of camera has a folding structure, it is a little inconvenient to adjust the focus and operate it during use. In particular, whether the leather cavity leaks light always makes people feel uneasy, and the shutter is also very easy to malfunction because the transmission mechanism is too long. The focusing mechanism is a double-image superimposed type, but as time goes by, the yellow frame inside is not only much inaccurate, but also much lighter in color and even no longer clear. Compared with dual-lens reflex cameras, this kind of camera is more convenient when using the 645 format, and it is easy to use both horizontally and vertically. Because the shutter has an anti-reshoot device, it won’t easily take overlapping photos. Unfortunately, this camera does not have the same filter port as the Seagull DSLR. It cannot use various internally threaded filters. It can only use jacket-type filters and hoods, which are currently difficult to buy.

I came into contact with this kind of camera even later, around 1996. I jointly organized a camera trade-in event with the Phoenix Northeast Company in a camera store in Fuxin, where customers brought in old domestic cameras, no matter how good or bad they were, and exchanged them for 30 - I spent 50 yuan to exchange for a Phoenix camera (whatever I exchanged made up for the price difference). After only two days, I was left with a carton of worn-out cameras. Among them, Peony had the most double-lens reflex cameras, followed by Seagull. There is a Seagull 203 here, everything is complete, but the shutter is broken. After I wiped it, I found someone to fix it, and I took it with me to play with for several days, but it still didn't load the film. Finally it was returned to the collection cabinet.

Since 916 has a detailed introduction, the indicators will not be introduced here.

Advantages: Easy to carry and lightweight. It is very convenient to shoot 645 with various compositions. There is a remake device. Not easy to travel.

Disadvantages: It is inconvenient to adjust the focus, the shutter is prone to malfunction, it is difficult to connect filters and hoods, and it is prone to stray light.

3. Hongmei HM-1 camera

Hongmei HM-1 leather cavity folding camera is relatively low-grade among its kind. Hongmei is a product of Wuxi Camera Factory. In addition to HM-1, there was also a Hongmei-5 double reflex camera, which was also a low-material, low-tech and low-cost 120 camera. There is a reason why the Wuxi factory took the low-end road. It was so close to Shanghai, the camera "powerhouse" at that time. It would obviously be unwise to blindly imitate cameras such as 4B like other manufacturers, not only because of the high cost. If you cannot sell at a low price, you will not be able to solve many problems due to limited technical capabilities. Even if it is produced, it will be of low quality and high price and no one will buy it. It is better to take a more resistant and popular path. So low-end, low-priced low-end cameras were developed. Hongmei Camera was right in taking the road of marketization, and it was also very successful judging from its subsequent output and market share.