MANUFACTURER S SPECIFICATIONS: Ricoh Mirai 35mm autofocus SLR with built-in 35-135mm f/4.2-5.6 variable-focal length lens. Serial No. 47102780. 
SHUTTER: Electronically controlled metal focal-plane, with speeds from 32 seconds to 1/2000 second, plus Bulb. 
FILM ADVANCE: Motor driven with single-frame and continuous modes, up to two fps. Auto-loading and rewind. 
EXPOSURE SYSTEM: Program AE, automatically shifts between wide-angle to normal to telephoto programs, with manual shift override. SPD cell reads TTL average pattern with automatic backlight control or center-weighted average pattern. Range EV 4 to 20. Exposure compensation ±4EV. ISO 25 to 5000 for DX-coded film; ISO 100 for non-coded. 
AUTO-FOCUS: Passive Phase detection system uses 128-element CCD to set lens steplessly from infinity to normal close-focus distance of 3 feet, 11 inches. Manual focus from 1 foot finder to 3 feet 11 inches in macro mode at 135mm focal length. 
FLASH: Built-in pop-up electronic flash located at left end of body. Recycle time approximately 3.5 seconds. Flash range with ISO 100 film, 3.9- 16 feet (wide-angle), 3.9-12.4 feet (tele). Daylight fill-flash possible. 
LENS: Non-inter-changeable Ricoh 35-135mm f/4.2-5.6 variable-focus, constructed of 15 elements in 13 groups. Accepts 52mm threaded filters. 
VIEWFINDER: Non-inter-changeable eye-level prism. Non interchangeable focusing screen with central AF sensing area. LEDs on bottom of image area show status of AF and flash systems. Viewfinder magnification of 0.8X (with lens set at 50mm and infinity) and displays 87 percent of image area. 
OTHER FEATURES: LCD panel on body indicates film frame number, film advance/ rewind, self-timer, exposure compensation, battery condition, fill-flash mode, continuous mode. Bulb, centerweighted average mode. Cancellable ten-second electronic self-timer with visible indicator. Tripod socket. Accepts optional 200mm teleconverter. 
BATTERY: One 6-volt CR-P2 lithium battery or four AAA batteries in locking compartment. 
PRICE: $795; TC-200M 1.5X Teleconverter, $110; SL-301 Electronic flash unit, $156; DB-5M Data Back, $98; Daylight filter, $26; Grip strap, $26.


Now it’s Ricoh's turn to plant a hybrid. The new creation is called the Mirai and, like its predeces-sors/competitors, it combines the simplicity of operation of a point-and-shoot with the sophisticated shooting capabilities of an SLR. In other words, it's a point-and-shoot SLR, fully automated with all the latest that modern electronics can provide.

The Mirai boasts the most flexible built-in zoom lens of any camera, ranging from 35mm f/4.2 to 135mm f/5.6. It’s a very versatile handful calculated to satisfy the needs of just about any photographer at any level of experience.

In keeping up with the trendsetters, Ricoh has gone the ergonomic route, coming up with a camera that may not look like a camera but, as the theory goes, is easier to hold, handle and, therefore, to use.

When it comes out of the box, the Mirai looks like a new breed of camera—almost. It’s flat and boxy, somewhat like a squashed video camcorder, measuring about 51/» inches wide, a little over three inches high and extending nearly five inches from front to back. But, by pushing a button on the right side, at its hub, you release the lock on a handgrip, which you can then pivot and lock at any one of six different click-stopped positions. Now it looks even more like a camcorder or, if you remember, an 8mm movie camera. But the prism-like bump along the top with its attached viewfinder eyepiece give it away as a still, reflex type camera. The left side of the body, which juts out almost as far as the lens, houses the built-in flash unit, creative controls and the auto-focus illuminator beam.

So much for shape. Like all modern cameras, the Mirai needs electric power, which it gets from batteries. So, step number one is to open the battery compartment by inserting a coin into the slot in the cap at the bottom of the hand grip and drop in a 6-volt CR-P2 (or equivalent) lithium cell. If this is too rich for your blood or too inaccessible, you can get by just as easily with four AAAs batteries. If you use the latter, you have to check the inside of the cap (which, unfortunately, is detachable, and thus losable) for the correct polarity.

Now slide the switch on top, alongside the right edge of the ’prism," forward to the "on” position and you’re ready to go. Be careful not to push it all the way, or you’ll find yourself in the macro mode. A small, rectangular LCD panel at the top front end shows up immediately, revealing a battery condition symbol. When only half of the two-part symbol shows, it's best to just finish the roll of film in the camera and then install a fresh power supply. Also appearing with the first turn-on is a pair of distance scales in feet and meters, with a series of dashes forming a line running between them. (More about that later.)

All film movement is, as expected, automatic. Opening the back is a two-stage process involving pressing a button on the left side and sliding a lever downwards. It's a bit tricky, requiring two fingers at first, but, with a little practice, we were able to make it a quick one-finger operation. Slip the film cartridge into the left compartment and pull out the leader past the film load mark near the take-up spindle. Close the back and you'll hear a soft whirr as the film is automatically advanced to frame number one. If the film has been loaded correctly, a cartridge symbol appears on the LCD panel, the dashed line previously mentioned moves across the panel, and the number “1” pops into view. The data will remain visible for about 15 seconds and then go blank (except for the battery condition indicator) if you don’t take further action. Slight pressure on the shutter release or the zoom control wheel reactivates the panel. Should the battery fail, the Mirai’s memory will retain all its data for about 30 minutes so you do have some leeway when replacing it.

The Mirai’s DX coding system (six pairs of contacts in the film cassette compartment) can handle films from ISO 25-5000, a hefty range that encompasses just about every film on the market today and beyond. With a non-DX coded film in the camera, the system defaults to ISO 100 but that can be overridden to some degree by a clever manipulation of one of the camera’s controls which we'll discuss later.

Under normal operation, you aim the camera so that the small focusing rectangle in the center of the viewfinder falls on the main part of your subject. Slight pressure on the shuuer release, at the right end of the body top, sets the AF mechanism in motion. As the lens zeros in on the subject you get a three-way confirmation. Along with the actual sharpening up of the subject on the finder screen—this is a true SLR after know—a green circular LED on the bottom of the screen lights up and an audible double-beep signal sounds. The beep can be turned off, if silence is needed or wanted, by sliding one of two control levers on the bottom left side of the body.

Flanking the green dot, two red inward-pointing arrows blink simultaneously if the AF system cannot focus because the subject is too close, does not have enough contrast, contains “hostile” patterns such as a series of horizontal lines or is blocked by an intruding foreground (bars in an animal's cage at the zoo, for example). For a close-up subject (nearer than 3.9 feet (1.6 meters), slide the on-off switch forward another notch to its macro setting to extend the lens to its telephoto position, and then resort to manual focusing. A close-up flower symbol in the finder tells you you're in the macro mode. Focus manually by turning the zoom control wheel. Again you get multiple focus confirmations: the focusing screen sharpens and the green LED lights up. The red arrows on either side of the LED light up one at a time to show you which way to turn the focusing wheel. When you reach proper focus, you won't get the beep but you will get the green signal.

In the normal (non-macro) mode, manual focus involves the same controls. But, first, you must slide the second lever on the camera bottom to disengage the AF system. Then press in a button on the right side of the lens housing while you operate the zoom wheel. While this involves cupping your left hand under the lens (with middle finger falling on the button), an action that gives you a steady grip, the actual focusing procedure is slow. You must rely on a visual check of the finder screen and the red and green signals. The procedure is similar to the remote controlled focusing of a slide projector.

On the more positive side, the Mirai provides a pre-expo-sure focus lock (obtained with slight pressure on the shutter release) with the green LED dot symbol providing visual confirmation. And with each focus setting, the dashed line in the LCD panel indicates the approximate distance set in feet and meters.

Rotating the zoom wheel varies the focal length smoothly and quietly. When you release the wheel, the focal length set appears in the LCD panel for about five seconds. However, the LCD data does not change while you are zooming, the correct data appearing only when you release the control wheel. If you want to set an intermediate focal length you have to operate the wheel with short strokes until the desired focal length appears. While the lens can be set at any point from 35-135mm, the LCD indication is to the nearest 5mm increment. Thus, while the panel may say 85mm, the lens could be set at any point in the mid 80s, from 82.5 to 87.5mm.

The Mirai relies on a fully programmed auto-exposure control and, unlike many similar systems, you’ll know what aperture and shutter speed are in use. They appear in the display area along the bottom of the viewfinder. These setting indications do double duty as warnings: the highest shutter speed and/or aperture blinks to warn of overexposure; the slowest and largest for underexposure. In addition, the shutter speed display will blink to warn you of a speed that’s too slow for hand-holding: 30 (1/30 second) or slower with the lens set at focal lengths from 35-70mm; 60 or slower for 70-135mm.

All told there are four programs in the Mirai’s exposure system—for the macro mode, 35-44mm range, 45-70mm and 71-135mm—with automatic shift from one to another as you change focal lengths. There is also a useful manual shift should you want to use a particular shutter speed or lens aperture. Just press one of the up/down buttons located right behind the shutter release until the desired speed or aperture setting appears in the finder display. An "S” appears to the left of the settings to indicate manual shift in play. Program shift can be cancelled either by pressing the reset button located next to the shutter release or turning off the main switch If the finder warnings recommend the use of flash, merely slide a switch at the top left to pop up the built-in unit. The unit does pop up with a rather disarming and noisy clack, but no harm is done. A red lightning bolt blinks at the extreme left end of the finder display while the unit is charging and recharging between shots (usual recycling time is about 3.5 seconds). When the subject is out of flash range (beyond 13 feet at the tele position; 16 feet at wide-angle with ISO 100 film) the lightning bolt symbol will blink.

To activate the Mirai’s fill-flash capability, press a button just behind the flash unit. The appropriate sun and lightening mark pops into the LCD panel. The fill-flash can be turned off by pressing the button again or by hitting reset. It is, however, the only control cancellable by turning the main power off. An accessory flash unit, the SL-301M, can be inserted into a special hot shoe at the left end of the body top and fastened with a good, sturdy locking lever. A fairly large four-AA battery unit with its own on-off switch, the SL-301M measures light off the film plane. Because of the Mirai's unique shoe, no other accessory flash can be used. The SL-301M (guide' number 98 feet with ISO 100 film) is for straight-ahead flash shots without the subtlety of bounce capability.

The Mirai’s generous assortment of options can provide you with the ability to handle just about any photographic situation, but the controls themselves are scattered across the body without a central cluster or control center. There is, however, a grouping of five of
the more sophisticated controls behind a small door on the left side. In addition to those near the shutter release, the two switches on the bottom of the camera and the flash unit, there is an auto exposure lock button at the upper right hand corner of the back and a self-timer button on top near the LCD panel.

The door opens from front to back, a minor inconvenience in the eyes of some of our testers, but once swung away it reveals the aptly-named "creative control panel." The continuous shooting mode button changes the film advance motor from single shot to continuous motor drive with a shooting rate of two frames per second. The button marked AV converts the meter from its normal automatic backlight control mode to a center-weighted average exposure meter. The bulb and manual rewind controls are self-explanatory. What’s left is the versatile exposure compensation button. Pressing that button and then the up/down buttons within three seconds adjusts the exposure setting up to ±4 EV in increments of '/3 EV. The amount of compensation is in dicated in the LCD panel, as are the settings of the other four creative controls. A blinking di ode does likewise in the find er—both very nice touches Use of the exposure override control allows you to plug non-DX coded film into the camera's exposure system. Since a non-DX film registers as ISO 100 you can adjust for under- or overexposure and thus "fool" the system.

In general, the Mirai’s rather hefty weight, just over 2 pounds, 3 ounces, works in its favor as far as handling goes, providing enough bulk to ensure a steady hold by the user. Unfortunately, most of the weight is concentrated on the left side, tending to throw the camera off balance unless you support that side firmly with your left hand While the switchable grip is a good idea and its six positions do provide versatility, we found it most useful in the “open" (straight down) position, which is the way we used it for most of our tests. When shooting verticals, the tendency is to hold the camera with the right hand up. This is fine for non-flash shots, but when the flash is in use you have to reverse position to keep the light on top, forcing you to close the grip to its straight-ahead position. The accessory Grip Belt GM is made to clip over the grip and will provide the additional support found with such devices on video camcorders, but Ricoh warns against using it as a carrying strap. Perhaps a stronger lug would make this a more useful accessory.

In addition to the grip strap and flash unit, Ricoh has provided several other worthwhile accessories for the Mirai: a multicoated UV filter that not only cuts down on haze but also acts as a protective device for the lens; a Tele-Converter TC-200M that extends the lens to a 200mm focal length, a 1.5-foot electronic cable release and 30-foot extension release for use in the remote control socket found on the right side of the lens. (This is a useful extra but the protective cap covering the socket is tiny and detachable, thus prone to misplacement or loss.) A very good, workable accessory data back will imprint either the time and date, or the date in three different configurations.

The Ricoh Mirai is, no doubt, the most versatile point-and-shoot SLR to come along so far. As can often happen under such sircumstances, little things get left out or ignored in favor of the bigger features. The manual focus option is great, but we would like to have seen some indication in the viewfinder of which mode, auto or manual, was in use.

But, in the long run, it’s the final result, the pictures, that count. Our tests revealed the auto-focusing system works very well and accurately. Exposure tests showed a dependably steady control over shutter speeds and aperture settings. And the film load system proved to be consistent and dependable. We still can’t tell if the Ricoh Mirai is the ultimate hybrid camera. It is, however, an imaginative approach and one of the better, more versatile point-and-shoot SLRs around today.
