EXAKTA KE 5 EXAKTA KE5

　It is a model called Exacta KE5, which is almost similar to the Kantaray/Carena, but it has a prism and a small window for viewing the aperture directly in the viewfinder. Normally, the aperture value should be visible outside the viewfinder frame, but on this camera it surprisingly appears in the upper center of the viewfinder frame. Probably because they inserted a prism so that the aperture value could be viewed directly without redesigning the area around the mirror box, they were unable to create space outside the viewfinder focal plane to display the aperture value. However, early AM Topkol had the same aperture ring as the RE Topkol N series, and this finder had numbers engraved in a position where the aperture could not be read. The K mount regulations seem to extend to this point, and if you attach the original Pentax lens to this camera, you will be able to read it properly. AM Top Call (Exactal) was later revised accordingly.
　AUTO WINDER-II is written on the winder, and at first glance it seems like it was attached to a TOPCON RE300, but interestingly, when it is removed, the plate that comes out on top is a simple one with no TOPCON characters printed on it. It is different from the traditional one in that it has something pasted on it and just says "Made in Japan." In addition, like the Exacta EDX3 above, the rewind crank and self-timer lever are all finished in black. This camera is probably the last 35mm SLR made by Tokyo Kogaku.
The last Topcon's camera. This camera was Launched about 1978. It is adopting the Pentax K mount. After this camera, Topcon announces the AE camera that says Topcon AM-1. However, it was not sold. But this camera was launched from Cima as CIMKO LS-1. The 3'rd image is the camera called Quantaray D2-RZ that the Topcon made for the order of Riz Camera. This camera has the same top cover as AM-1. Next image is CARENA KSM 1. This camera is almost same with QUANTARAY. The 5'th image is EXAKTA KE5. This does not use the EX mount (RE mount). This camera equips the prism in order to find an iris value. When this time, Topcon has selected the direction of the evacuation from the 35mm SLR camera industry regrettably.