A dealer friend said of the new Fujica AZ-1 compact 35mm SLR that he wouldn’t stock it because it was “just another ‘me too’ camera.” 1 politely suggested that he was out of his butternut gourd since most cameras are “me too’s” in one way or another. We argued a bit and he asked me to convince him. How does one do that? Tell the man that the AZ-1 is a good camera for both pro and tyro alike? Well, that’s what it comes down to. In the end he decided that he would stock the whole outfit. Score one for me, and Fuji.

What we have here then is a very efficient, nicely styled, auto-wound, LED read-off, aperture-preferred, center-weighted, th rough-the-lens metering camera that yours truly can get his hands around. It’s all very well to make a compact SLR but it’s another matter to make it so that an average-size hand can operate the controls. There is no doubt that the Fujica AZ-1 is one of the most fiddle-free compacts that has hit town lately. 1 like it, so should you. No, not because I say so but on its own merits as a picture-taking tool.

The Fujica AZ-1 compact SLR is an excellent camera. I gave it a rough time out in the woods and watersheds of New Jersey and it never faltered Fuji would like to sell it to you with the auto-winder, the short 43-75mm f/3.5 zoom, and their own brand of automat -ic computer flash, the Auto-Strobo AZ.

More of the latter anon.

Who wants to go forth with only an f/3.5 lens even though it is a zoom? Well, before you get all bent out of shape I would respectfully remind you that there are plenty of high speed color films around, both reversal and negative. Many of these films are quite happy to be push-processed. Add to this the plethora of fast black-and-white emulsions.

I concur with Fuji’s idea of offering the camera with the 43-75mm zoom. It’s a good zoom, well behaved at all focal lengths and, used on the AZ-1 in conjunction with the electric winder, the whole deal makes for a fluid and agile picture-taking package. Another good reason is the fact that Fuji retains its Practica thread mount, which also has a nifty safety lock. A zoom range of 43-75mm is a handy ratio and more than adequate for most shooting situations. It is particularly useful for fast action reportage. The Fujinon zoom is a push-pull type, and focusing is light and positive with no discernible backlash. I wish it would come in a little closer than four feet, but I realize that one cannot have everything.

The little auto-winder is neat and compact without any fussy attitudes towards its work except that it does like four fresh 1.5-volt AA batteries, otherwise it slows down. Attachment to the camera is a cinch as is loading the batteries. The only control on the drive is an on/off switch. When “on” the camera’s manual film advance is disconnected. Turning the drive off allows manual film advance for silent running. There is, naturally, an extension button for the film rewind function. Rewind is manual via the conventional fold-out rewind crank cum pull-up to open the camera back. Can you do multiple exposures with the AZ-1? Yes, indeedy. You simply use the old standby of taking up the slack in the film cassette, hold in the rewind button and cock the shutter mechanism. You may do it using the auto-winder or sans autowinder. Registration is excellent but remember that the frame counter advances normally. The electric “thumb” is not the quietest in creation but it is not objectionably loud. Its running sound is quite low in pitch. Speaking of noise, the AZ-1 is surprisingly quiet in operation. This may be due to the fact that Fuji uses a cloth focal-plane shutter.

Metering with the AZ-1 is neat. The camera’s electronic functions are off until you take up first pressure on the shutter release. As you apply pressure, the meter reads and locks in the exposure. Unless you go all the way and fire the camera, you must ease up on the release if you wish to take a different reading.

This exposure lock works for you since it enables you to move in close and meter a specific area and then recompose your shot. Using the zoom it gets even better. Zoom in and meter, take up first pressure, zoom out and compose. It’s a bit like having a spot meter but don’t take the analogy too far. The meter is heavily center-weighted although it is an averaging system using a silicon photo diode for the readings. Shutter speeds only are displayed along the right-hand vertical edge of the viewing screen. They are contained in a transparent area which, although actually in the picture field, is so neatly done that it does not infringe much upon one’s vision. An LED lights up alongside the appropriate shutter speed so that you know what’s what. If you exceed the meter’s coupling range, an LED at either the top or the bottom of the scale will flash. Take heed or pay the consequence. Shutter speeds range from 1/1000 of a second at the top to 2-15 at the bottom. Two hyphen fifteen means 1/15 down to Уг a second and the hyphenated figures are the only ones in red. The rest are engraved in black. Speeds are selected in steps. This means that should you wish to go half stop you must twiddle the aperture ring carefully while holding in the reading. It’s easier than it sounds. This is probably a quicker way of arriving at exposure compensation than turning the shutter speed dial to its plus/minus one or two stop compensations. You just have to acquaint yourself with the camera and the direction in which the aperture ring should be turned to go for over- or underexposure.

Top deck controls on the AZ-1 are neat and simple. The shutter speed dial is eminently readable, the automatic setting being engraved in black on an orange field. On either side of the automatic mark are the exposure compensation legends. Turn the dial one click towards you and you gain one stop (plus one). Two clicks and you go to two stops (plus 2). Turn the dial away from you and the reverse is true. The only other settings are manual mechanical shutter speeds. Note that they are mechanical which means that if your batteries depart this vale of tears you are still in business for 1/1000, 1/250, and 1/60 of a second (which is also manual X synch setting). There is also the ubiquitous В setting. Film speed setting is achieved by the conventional pull-up-the-shutter-speed-ring and twist to the requisite ASA. Film speed settings run from 25 to 3200 ASA.

The AZ-1 is hot-shoed and you may also plug a gun into the camera by a 3mm coaxial plug. If you decide to go for the Fuji Auto-Strobo AZ gun you don’t even need to set the shutter dial to the synch mode. Two tiny auxiliary contacts set into the camera hot shoe relay the information about the gun to the camera and, when the capacitors come up to charge, the camera automatically goes to synch. The nice thing here is that if you run down the electronic flash’s capacitors (and it’s easy with a drive), the camera goes back to automatic metering and you may continue to shoot by available light until the charge comes back up. By the way, aperture information is automatically relayed to the gun by the camera so one assumes that synchrosunlight on automatic mode would be a cinch. It would be a matter of juggling the metering a little so that you get a readoff of 1/60 or less.

The depth-of-field preview and stop-down metering button on the AZ-1 is one of the nicest 1 have ever had the pleasure of using. It’s a big, black, soft action button on the front of the camera. Apart from that and mentioning that there is a mechanical self-timer actuated by its own button, there isn’t much else to tell.

Loading the AZ-1 is a breeze. The camera uses a drop-in type loading chamber and the film leader is pushed easily into a multi-slotted collar on the take-up spool. Slam the back shut, crank off the blanks and away you go.

How did the camera behave in the field? Well, if I tell you that I crashed through briars, fell over rocks, and even came close to falling in the Black River while chasing a diminutive hummingbird would you believe me? The three lenses I used all turned out to be excellent. Aside from the Fujinon 43-75mm zoom, I also had a 24mm f/2.8 wide-angle and a 200mm f/4 tele. Nice lenses, small and compact, with no evil ways. Anyway if you don’t like my choice of focal lengths, Fuji has 17 for you to choose from including a fisheye. There are all sorts of goodies for those of you who like to indulge in such arcane pursuits as microphotography, macrophotography and so on. The suggested list price of the Fujica AZ-1 with 55mm f/1.8 lens is $399.50; with 50mm f/1.4 lens, $449.50; and with 43-75mm zoom lens, $499.50. The auto-winder is $115.

The AZ-1 has absolutely no temperament; it simply gets on with the business of taking sharp, well exposed pictures, which is the name of the game as. far as 1 am concerned.

— Lie/ Ericksenn
