MANUFACTURER S SPECIFICATIONS: Yashica Samurai X3.0 35mm auto-focus SLR with built-in 25-75mm f/3.4-4.3 lens. Serial No.143033. SHUTTER: Electronically controlled be-tween-lens leaf, with speeds from 2-1/500 second. 
FILM ADVANCE: Motor-driven with single-frame and continuous modes, up to two fps. Auto-loading and rewind. 
EXPOSURE SYSTEM: Program AE automatically shifts between wide-angle and telephoto. SPD cell reads TTL average center-weighted pattern with automatic shift to spot metering. Range EV 3-18. ISO 50 to 3200 for DX-coded film; ISO 100 for non-coded. 
AUTOFOCUS: Passive phase detection system uses CCD array to set lens steplessly from 3.3 feet to infinity. 
FLASH: Built-in electronic flash located at top of body front. Recycle time approximately 2.5 seconds. Flash range with ISO 100 film, 3.3-10 feet. 
LENS: Non-inter-changeable Yashica 25-75mm f/3.5-4.3, constructed of 14 elements in 13 groups. Accepts 49mm threaded filters. VIEWFINDER: Non-interchangeable eye-level prism. Non-interchangeable focusing screen with central AF sensing area. LEDs on bottom of image area show status of AF and flash systems. Viewfinder magnification 0.5-1.52X (with lens set at infinity) and displays 83 percent of image area. 
OTHER FEATURES: LCD panel on body indicates film frame number, film ad-vance/rewind, self-timer, battery condition, drive mode, data back setting. Cancellable ten-second electronic self-timer with visible indicator. Tripod socket. Built-in optional data back. 
BATTERY: One 6-volt 2CR5 lithium battery in locking compartment. PRICE: Yashica Samurai X3.0 with case, $488; Samurai X4.0 without case, $630 ($24 for case); Portrait Flash Adaptor SM-S1, $21; Flash CS-140, $39.


When the Yashica Samurai X3.0 first appeared, its unusual shape and approach to the concept of point-and-shoot photography prompted many industry observers to recognize it as the camera with the shape of the future. A dissident minority, particularly those with long memories, took one look at the boxy, vertically oriented smooth body and immediately recognized it as the shape of the past. Not only did it have the look and handling characteristics of something called a super 8 movie camera, its film format resembled one that used to be called halfframe, or single-frame, 35mm. Yashica calls the Samurai's format Double 35, but what's in a name? The end result is twice as many negatives, measuring 17x24mm (3/4x1 inch), as you would ordinarily get on a roll of standard 35mm film—48 pictures, for example, on a 24-exposure roll.

But shape and format aside, make no mistake—the Samurai is a legitimate 35mm point-and-shoot camera with an innovative ergonomic design and just about all the automatic, electronically assisted features that have become standard fare on all cameras of this type.

This rather curious reevaluation of point-and-shooters has produced one of the first ergonomic SLRs and the first to sport a built-in 3X zoom lens. Strangely enough, it came about as a result of a survey among Japanese businessmen who wanted a camera with a long-range zoom lens they could put in their attache cases. They could have had a 3X zoom on a lens/shutter auto-fo-cus type camera, but preferred an SLR design small enough to be used as a "memo” type camera. In order to make it flat and small enough to fit these requirements, Yashica abandoned the full-frame 35mm format, figuring the picture quality from half-frame negatives on the latest fine-grain film would be good enough for these memo-type shots. The idea of a between-the-lens shutter SLR may seem old fashioned but its complement of modern electronic controls positions the Samurai as an innovative, trend-setting P&S model in its own right.

Before we get to the camera, a reassuring word about halfframe...oops, Double 35. Processing, at least for negative film, should not be a problem. Photofinishers, including one-hour mini labs, need only modify their printing equipment by inserting the appropriate lens and negative transport system to give you the standard 31/2x5 or 4x6-inch prints you've come to expect from 35mm negatives. (You may have to wait a bit longer than an hour for results in this case.) Transparencies are a different matter. You have to tell the lab to return them to you unmounted. You get back a continuous roll of processed film, which you then must cut apart and mount yourself. (Two companies will supply half-frame mounts by mail: Pic Mount Corp., 40-20 22nd St., Long Island City, NY 11101; and Gepe 216 Little Falls Rd., Cedar Grove, NJ 07009.) Yashica is banking on the fact that the majority of point-and-shoot photography is in negative film, particularly color negative, which the labs can easily handle.

In resurrecting the two-for-one negative, Yashica's designers were able to solve a problem that may have caused considerable grief among fans of the format in its earlier incarnations. As you well know, conventional 35mm cameras, when held normally, produce a horizontal picture. The first halfframe cameras were conventional 35s and shot a vertical picture when held horizontally. In the vertically oriented Samurai, the film travels vertically from bottom to top so you get a horizontal photo when you hold it in its normal position; turn it 90 degrees and you can shoot a vertical.

If you still think this is a conventionally shaped camera that should be held with its long side flat, you'll be persuaded otherwise when you first pick it up. For one thing, all controls and the largish, clear LCD info panel on its 2 1/4-inch wide back are made to be read when the camera's long (4 1/2 inch) side is held upright. More important, however, are its two recessed grooves. As you cup the Samurai in your right hand, wrapping your thumb around the bottom, the thumb falls naturally and comfortably into the groove on the bottom of the left side. At the same time, the last three fingers land just as naturally in the recess at the top front of the Samurai's right side while your index finger comes to rest on the round shutter release button just behind the groove.

Thus, you have, in effect, a camera you can operate with one hand—that is, if you don't mind shifting fingers slightly to hit one of the two buttons immediately above the shutter release that zoom the f/3.5-4.3 lens from 25mm to 75mm and all points in between. If you must, or want, to zoom in the one-handed position, the operation can be a bit awkward and slow. A better idea is to wrap your left hand over the top of the body, super 8 style, so that your left index and middle fingers fall on the zoom buttons. This two-fisted handling is not only faster, it makes for a steadier grip on this relatively light, 20-ounce machine.

In use we found fhe Samurai rested comfortably in our hands, largely because of the intelligently located grooves.
When used with the two-handed grip, it was well balanced with all controls within easy reach of their designated fingers. Balance was also aided by the self-contained "interior" zoom lens, a design that goes a long way toward eliminating the problems of imbalance that often arise when long lenses are added to otherwise conventional 35mm-type bodies. At 20 ounces it may be a mite heftier than many of the earlier P&S models but this, plus its uniquely contoured shape, actually make for steadier han-oling.

The Samurai gets its power from a 6-volt 2CR5 lithium battery, which you can easily replace by unscrewing (via the usual, handy coin) the compartment lid on the bottom right front and popping in a fresh cell. You'll know when to do it (after about 1,000 frames) because a battery symbol will appear in the LCD panel and start blinking Even so, you'll still have enough power for 24 to 36 exposures. You can change batteries in mid-roll without losing any continuity in the LCD panel's indicators because a second lithium cell, which runs the built-in data back (more on that later) also acts as an LCD memory backup. This keeps track of, among other things, how many frames have been exposed. We re told this backup cell will last about ten years so there’s no need for immediate worry But if the date display starts blinking sometime around the turn of the century, take the camera to a Yashica dealer to have the backup cell replaced.

Your first task after loading the battery is loading the film— and it may be a little disconcerting at first, though we got more comfortable with it after a few practice runs. Slide a button on the bottom of the camera in the direction of the arrow and the back, hinged at the top, pops open. Since it is hinged at the top, you have to lift it up or hold the camera sideways so that it remains open while loading. The interior is standard except, of course, that the film cartridge chamber, with its four DX contacts, is under the lens. The chamber itself is smaller than usual, but you still draw the film leader out until its tip is under the orange mark on the underside of the back and the sprocket holes are engaged on both sides. Popping the cassette into its chamber can be a little tricky until you realize you should insert the bottom first. Chances are you'll have enough leader already out of the cartridge—and you may even have to wind a little bit back into the cartridge—before loading. Then it's just a matter of closing the back and letting the auto load/advance-to-frame-one system take over. Right away you may be startled to hear and see (by way of the LCD panel's flashing PROPER LOAD symbol) eight frames clicked off before the number 1 appears. Remember—it’s two-for-one.

Now you're ready to take pictures. Turn the power on by depressing a red button within a black rectangle upward When the power comes on, two symbols immediately pop into view on the LCD panel—the cartridge symbol indicating proper film advance and the mode indicator The latter setting is always in the auto flash mode. Exposure is, of course, normal and the flash is automatically activated in low light when you first turn on the power, no matter what settings were in effect when you last turned the camera off. Pressing the small gray MODE button in the lower of two rows of controls under the LCD panel engages the night SCENE mode. This is indicated by an appropriate moon-and-star symbol, which disengages the flash, enabling tripod-supported time exposures up to two seconds. Another press of this button displays both symbols, which enables you to shoot fill-flash. (If the subject brightness is adequate the flash will not fire.)

To the right of the mode button, a tiny gray button activates the auto-rewind mechanism should you want to remove your film in mid-roll. At the extreme right you'll find another gray button that controls the film drive options. Normally, after turning on the power, that is, you have the usual singleframe motor-driven operation. By pressing the drive button you can get, in order, continuous shooting at a rate up to 2 fps in bright light on an already-focused subject, a ten-second cancellable silent (blinking LED on the camera's front) self-timer and a combination setting for three consecutive shots after a self-timed ten-second span.
But no matter what drive or exposure mode is in effect, the operating principles are similar to conventionally shaped P&S cameras. A small rectangle in the center of the viewfinder serves as the target area for the Samurai’s passive phase detection auto-focusing system. Slight pressure on the shutter release locks in the AF setting and a green LED dot at the bottom strip of the finder lights up when the AF system has completed its task. If the LED blinks, your subject is not in focus, although you’ll still be able to trip the shutter.

If flash is needed, a red LED dot appears in the finder to the left of the green AF signal.
Steady to indicate flash-ready, it blinks immediately after exposure to show that the unit is recycling. While the flash is recycling you cannot trip the shutter, operate the zoom buttons or fire the shutter while you're zooming.

Like other similarly controlled AF cameras, the Samurai is subject to the same passive system bugaboos. It won’t focus on subjects that are too dark or too light, that have low contrast or just horizontal lines (the proverbial Venetian blind) or a consistent pattern of vertical lines (a child’s playpen, for example), or an indistinct subject, such as smoke. In such cases we picked out a subject at a distance comparable to that of our main subject, locked the AF on it with slight pressure on the shutter release, recomposed and shot.

In addition to the normal complement of auto functions—film movement, focus, flash and exposure—the Samurai provides backlight compensation. The Samurai's centerweighted metering system automatically switches to a spot metering mode when you aim the camera at someone against heavy backlighting and reads the subject in the center of the finder area for proper exposure Or, if necessary, it will switch all the way to auto-flash to make the exposure correct

Now for the top row of control buttons on the back, those just under the LCD panel. They  control the built-in data back on which the date can be set in any one of three ways—American style (month first), European (day first) or Japanese (year first). You can also set the date and time on a 24-hour clock. Or you can choose nothing at all. The calendar is good until December 31, 2019—or after you’ve exhausted three of the backup batteries!

At the end of the roll, auto-re-wind goes into effect, the frame counter counts down to zero and the cartridge symbol blinks. All these actions will also occur if you elect to rewind in mid-roll. The symbol keeps blinking and all controls are shut off until you remove your film.

All controls on the Samurai are intelligently placed and, with the exception of the date setting and mid-roll rewind buttons, large enough for convenient manipulation. You can easily change the mode buttons (exposure, drive, date) on the back with a fingernail—unless you're the nervous editorial type who keeps his fingernails well-gnawed. You can take care of the tiny buttons with a standard piece of accessory-type equipment called the Eyepiece Cover—one of the neatest, most versatile little items seen around here in quite a while. A more-or-less rectangular piece of plastic, it has a hole in one side, a push-in eyepiece plug in the other and a pointed tip at one end. It must be used on the carrying strap, which is not a bad idea since you always know where it is and you can’t lose it. The pointed end can be pressed into service, operating the tiny buttons mentioned above, or to adjust the diopter correction of the viewfinder eyepiece (in itself a very useful extra). Or you can attach the lens cap to the eyepiece plug and thus always be assured of the location of that essential, but pesky, little item. If you need to block excess light from entering the finder during a self-timed shot, the cover is tailor-made to snap right into the eyepiece. This clever little gadget comes as standard equipment, but it loses much of its usefulness if you don’t believe in camera neck straps.

And speaking of accessories, the Samurai has a couple of its own, plus a half dozen more planned for it and an upcoming newer model: a rubberized finder eyepiece cup and the Portrait Flash Adaptor SM-S1, which clips over the flash unit in front, and over the top of the camera to, respectively, block the built-in flash and provide a conventional hot shoe. Into the latter you can slip either Yashica’s portrait-type CS-140 or a larger, long-range electronic flash unit.

Last fall at the Photokina trade show in West Germany, Yashica introduced an upgraded, slightly more sophisticated model of the Samurai, the X4.0, which is just about to make its entrance in America. Sporting a slightly wider, all-black body, the 4’s chief claim to fame is its longer range 25-iQ0mm f/3.8-4.8 zoom lens. Then there is a built-in hot shoe that accepts any accessory flash unit, auto-flash fill capability, and, most striking, an extra drive mode. Aptly indicated by the symbol of a golfer going through his swing, it provides a sequence of five exposures within a two-second interval— perfect for analyzing that swing or similar activities such as your tennis stroke, pitching motion or pancake flipping technique.

In the accessory department, the X4.0 can be enhanced by two lens converters, a 1 4X tele and a 0.8X wide angle; a close-up lens set; and a flash diffuser. Introduced with the 4, but also usable on the 3, are a plastic handgrip and two straps, a hand model that’s big enough to accommodate the Eyepiece Cover and a Grip Strap that’s not.

The Yashica Samurai was actually the father of the ergonomic revolution and thus, despite an unusual body orientation and reversion to an older format, has led the way in making point-and-shoot cameras easier and more convenient to use.The question "Do I really need twice as many pictures per roll of film?" still remains, however. Our tests showed very little difference in 8x10 prints made with the Samurai and full frame 35mm negatives. Any difference in quality for 3'/2x5- or 4x6-inch prints—the nominal standards for this type camera—was even more minimal We also found the Samurai exposure accuracy to be very steady and consistent, well within tolerances Amateurs, often beleaguered by the formidable task of finishing up a whole 36-exposure roll" may be put off by the prospect of finishing 72! But they may find it makes more sense to use the longer roll considering the fact they may be able to photograph an entire party, weekend trip or similar P&S camera "assignment" without having to change film. Then again, the subconscious realization that there's lots of film left in the camera may free the user to shoot with more abandon, thus possibly reaping benefits in the form of more candid, natural looking shots. Along the way, he just might be able to improve his shooting techniques with all that extra experience.

Though somewhat limited in the number of options available to the user—when compared to some of its more complex and glamorous competitors—the Samurai nevertheless provides all the basic functions, plus a few of its own exclusives, that any point-and-shoot fan really needs. That, plus its doubled film capacity, makes it one of the more useful compact lens/ shutter type 35mm cameras available today.	

Yashica Samurai 26-75—i t/3.5-4.3

Field test evaluation: Transparencies were crisp and snappy with detail well-rendered. Extremely slight barrel distortion noted at 25mm with very slight softness in corners. Very slight light falloff. Flare was well controlled. Results at 50mm were similar. At 75mm very slight pincushion distortion was present with slightly soft corners. Flare well-controlled. Overall results showed good sharpness and image quality.
Optical bench analysis: (Due to automatic operation of the camera our optical bench analysis was done only with lens wide open.) 25mm, on axis, slight overcorrected spherical aberration with red/green flare present. Image slightly off center. Off axis, slight high coma mixed with astigmatism.

75mm, on axis, slight overcorrected spherical aberration, with red/green flare noted, image slightly decentered Off axis, very slight high coma, lateral color present.


