LEICA R-4: FIRST LEITZ SLR FOR PROS? 

MANUFACTURER’S SPECIFICATIONS: Leica R-4 35mm single lens reflex camera. 
LENS: 50mm f/1.4 Summilux-R (No. 2901943) in Leitz interchangeable bayonet mount, stops to f/16, focusing to 20 in.'(0.5 m), accepts E67 accessories. 
SHUTTER: Electronically-controlled Seiko MFC-ES vertical-travel, metal-blade focal-plane with speeds from 1 to 1/1000 sec., plus В, X and 1/1000 sync speeds, electronic self-timer. 
VIEWING: Fixed eye-level prism with interchangeable focusing screen having central split-image rangefinder, microprism collar, and full-area fine-focusing microprism field.
LEDs indicate shutter speed/ aperture selected automatically, autoexposure mode or manual operation, over, underexposure, or metering range, flash ready. Direct aperture and manual shutter speed readouts in finder. 
OTHER FEATURES: Two 1.5-volt silver-oxide batteries power shutter and silicon photodiode meter circuit. Cell in mirror chamber measures continuous light, full area or selective spot via fresnel secondary mirror for auto exposure in aperture-preferred (you set the aperture, camera sets the shutter speed) or shutter-preferred (you set the shutter, camera sets the aperture) auto-exposure, 
ASA 12 to 3200, full manual override, ±2-stop auto-exposure compensation, memory hold on shutter release, electromagnetic shutter release with mechanical release for B, 1 /100 sec., provision for Minolta-type dedicated flash units, accessory motor winder and motor drive, removable back. 
PRICE: S1695; with 50mm f/1.4 Summilux-R, $3120; with 50mm f/2 Summicron-R, $2175.

The Leica camera has always been a living legend. Generations of svelte and elegant 35mm rangefinder cameras have long established Leitz as the undisputed king of the rangefinder mountain. So—back in 1960— when rumors were rife that Leitz was soon to enter the SLR arena with a reflex to end all reflexes, many expected that it would be as compact and hand-holdable as a Leica M-3, as bright and easy to focus as the magnificent Visoflex reflex attachments, and hopefully even able to take rangefinder lenses.

What we got instead was the original Lei-caflex of 1964—a chubby, mechanically rugged, external-metering camera taking a whole new series of bayonet-mount lenses. It was evident at the time that Leitz still considered reflex focusing of wide-angle to normal lenses a questionable compromise at best, for the original Leicaflex had an astonishing focusing system—perhaps the most brilliant and clear reflex image yet seen. However, this commendable clarity was achieved by, essentially, viewing an aerial image over most of the finder area and focusing on a jumbo microprism screen in the center. Depth of field and indeed focusing itself could only be judged by observing the central focusing circle, in a manner similar to the famed Zeiss Contaflex. Since there was no way to stop the lens down for depth-of-field preview anyway, the point was, perhaps, moot. In short, Leitz had achieved a brilliant, parallax-free, precisely-framing viewfinder with precise focusing possible only in the center and no way to view the zone of image sharpness. It was, conceptually, very much like a rangefinder camera.

Although technically interesting, the concept was basically an interim compromise. People wanted full reflex viewing, not a surrogate rangefinder camera.

Succeeding Leitz reflexes solved that problem, and many others. The Leicaflex SL introduced depth-of-field preview, a new, thinner body shape, increasing focal-length options in the lens line, and the razor-sharp flare-free selective through-the-lens metering that has been the hallmark of Leitz SLRs ever since. The SL-2 added aperture readouts in the finder, extra metering sensitivity, a high-speed motor drive, and finder illumination. Through the development period, the basic lens mount remained the same while an additional cam was added to lenses as body and meter functions proliferated.

Gradually the wizards of Wetzlar shifted their focus from rangefinder to reflex, always at a safe distance behind the crafty camera-crafters of the orient. The shift from matchless quality match-needle metering to fully automatic must have seemed heretical to Wetzlar. Precision of construction and full control of image quality and exposure were paramount. How could convenience be important?

Yet the change did occur. In 1976, with the introduction of the Leica R-3, Leicaflexes became full-fledged Leicas for the first time, and Leitz had a reflex that could compete on the mass market for the first time, offering selective automation without sacrificing the premium quality synonymous with the name.

So a hybrid SLR was born out of Japan, as Wetzlar remanufactured and modified Minolta’s redoubtable XE-7, converting it into a selective and averaging aperture-preferred automatic electronic SLR capable of supporting its standards. After the introduction of the R3 winder, some pros began to take the camera in hand as they searched for more durable hardware. But limitations in lens line-up, motor speed, and pro-oriented accessories held back full acceptance.

And so, at Photokina, in 1980, the R-4 was unveiled—a compact, solid, mechanically and electronically sophisticated camera with a broadened accessory range including a most versatile automatic metering set-up. They termed it "the camera that can simply do everything." Operative here are the two words “simply" and "everything.”

Let’s look at "everything” first. The R-4 is the first Leica reflex to take both a 2-fps winder and a 4-fps motor drive interchangeably. But the big news is the exposure system. Taking the R-3 several steps further, the R-4 measures and exposes in five modes— selective manual metering (with full functioning meter), aperture-preferred full-area metering, aperture-preferred selective-area metering, full-area programmed exposure (both shutter speed and aperture change simultaneously in a program selected to minimize camera movement and maximize good results without thought), and shutter-preferred full-area metering. If you select the wrong (or shall we say inappropriate) speed, the camera will warn you and change it automatically until a good exposure can be obtained with the lens aperture range available to it.

Very much like the Minolta XD-11, you might say. Like the R-3, which was based on Minolta’s now discontinued XE-7, the R-4 is a hybrid camera. You might say it’s out of Japan, by Germany, assembled in Portugal. Taking some of Minolta’s electronics, basic body parts, and shutter mechanism—with much earnest German redesigning and remanufacturing to hone the mechanics and further refine and add versatility to the electronic—Leitz has now transmuted the XD-11 into a camera capable of handling a 4-frames-per-second motor drive, taking interchangeable focusing screens, added programmed automatic operation and spotreading capabilites in aperture-preferred and manual modes without increasing overall size and adding only 2 oz. to the weight.

Let's take a closer look at what we’re being given for our money. This is the first SLR to offer, at the flick of a switch, automatic exposure (both full-area and selective-area types), programmed exposure for total hands-off automation, and shutter-speed preferred automatic exposure. In other words, exposure-wise it combines the virtues of the Minolta XD-11, the Canon A-1 and the previous Leica R-3—all with flick-of-a-switch convenience—and in a body scarcely larger than the XD-11. Why we need this multimode versatility and what we can achieve with these extra strings on our photo bow, we will find out shortly.

The R-4’s a handsome brute that carries forth the rugged simplicity of the "Leitz look" in spite of its compactness. The black chrome finish hides a 1mm-thick zinc die-cast top plate while 0.8mm of brass protects the gearing in the bottom from shocks and over-enthusiastic tripod tighteners. Great care has been taken to shield and protect both the electronic and mechanical components from mechanical shock and the elements.

Starting at the top, with the right hand’s control cluster, we have a smooth, 130° non-ratcheted wind lever with a plastic cushioned tip and a 45° standoff angle. Just to its right, a segmented window reveals a white frame counter dial with highly-visible, elegant black numerals. Just in front of the wind lever hub, a pentagonal film control window is black when the camera is empty and becomes progressively whiter when film is correctly inserted, and progressively blackens as one shoots through the roll. It provides an instant confirmation of correct film loading and a progressive at-a-glance guide as one shoots through the roll. Moving to the left, we find a ribbed, rubber-topped shutter-speed dial. It’s black, with white numbers running from 1 sec. to 1/1000 sec., plus X (for flash), В (for long exposures without battery drain) and 1 / 100. Both В and 1/100 sec. are mechanically operated, will work with dead batteries, and are tripped mechanically by a secondary linkage to the Compur-threaded electromechanical shutter release in its center.

Depressing the release a mere 0.3mm, switches on the circuits, measured exposures at certain auto-exposure settings are memorized after 1 mm of travel, release of electronically-controlled exposure times occurs after you press the release in 1.3 mm; the mechanical release for В and 100 occurs after 2.25 mm of travel (figures supplied by Leitz). An easily-felt rest position prevents inadvertent shutter release quite effectively. No, you can’t fire the R-4 with Minolta's X-series remote release switches. Remote tripping must be done through a normal cable release or a Leitz remote cord plugged into the winder or motor drive.

Just in front of the speed dial, and concentric to it, is the self-locking selector switch for metering modes. Pressing its central segment toward the shutter release unlocks it, permitting rapid selection of the metering mode, denoted by the symbols ©, ®, [a], [p], and (Tl. The mode selected can be conveniently checked through a duplicate set of LED finder readouts. Let’s save the wonders of mode selection and finder readouts for a second, and visit the left-hand controls first.

A well-executed rewind crank with pivoting, knurled grip is surrounded by a film-speed-setting dial with black on white ASA and DIN setting windows. The range of ASA speeds extends from 12 to beyond 3200. Depressing a small button toward the camera back releases the dial for setting and, simultaneously, tests the battery via a red LED directly in front of it. Unlike other battery-test circuits, this one is designed for a longer duration test. Hold the button down for 5 sec.; if the light dims, hie thee to a battery dealer or suffer soon the strictures of B-and-1/100-sec.-only photography. The test circuit is designed to give advance warning while there’s still some energy available. An exposure override lever is coupled to the ASA ring, and offers plus or minus two stops of exposure bias when the 0 button just in front of the LED is pushed. The exposure bias may be adjusted in Уз-stop increments with full stops click-stopped, and is adjusted by a regrettably small metal tab just below the window. This makes it somewhat slow to set under pressure. Extenuating circumstances are offered, however. A flashing red V LED in the finder provides a foolproof warning that override has been set and, when the camera is set for selective aperture-preferred metering, the shutter release locks your exposure reading (for a minimum of 30 sec.) when you press the shutter release in 1 mm. Since the ASA and override dials interact, full ± 2-stop overrides can only be set between ASA 50 and 800. You cannot, for example, “add” exposure automatically at ASA 25 and "subtract” it at ASA 3200. This is the usual practice with exposure override systems.

Now let's get to the finder. At first glance, we see a cooler, contrastier viewing and focusing image, seemingly higher in magnification than in a comparison XD-11. Leitz's semi-transparent mirror passes 30% of the light striking it to the metering mechanism, but the remaining 70% is so efficiently utilized that the finder image is brighter than competitive cameras with normal mirrors. Viewfinder magnification is claimed to be 0.85 with a 50mm lens.

Through-the-lensmount focusing screen interchange is featured for the first time in a Leitz SLR. It utilizes a special spring-loaded tweezer supplied with each screen.

In the center of each screen, a fine black line, easily visible yet not distracting, outlines the selective metering field used in aperture-preferred selective and manual metering. Shutter-speed and aperture scales appear along the right side of the finder image as needed (just outside of the field of view, as in the Minolta XD finders), while LED indicators for exposure mode and other functions and reflected digits for lens aperture, and manual shutter speeds appear along the bottom of the finder. All circuits are "go" once either the shutter release or the program selector lever is depressed (or in motorized use). Unique to the Leitz exposure display are its unusually brilliant exposure-indicating red LEDs, round for shutter speeds shorter than 1 /30 sec. and apertures smaller than f/5.6. The appearance of a square LED serves as a warning to be careful—use a tripod for the slow speeds or focus with extra care because of limited depth of field at the widest apertures. Arrow heads above and below the scales indicate that the shutter speed or aperture preset is too high or too low respectively for accurate exposure, and should be modified. The top triangular LED also flashes when a suitably dedicated electronic flash is fully charged. More on flash later!

The mode indicators along the bottom of the frame are a revelation in multi-function versatility. As you get to know them, they tell you more and more. Let's run through them in order.

First we have the V triangle. This flashes on and off if you have set the exposure override adjustment off the standard setting by as little as half a stop. If it glows steadily, it’s telling you that the light level is too low for accurate, linear exposure metering. EV limits at ASA 100 with an f/1.4 lens wide open are V* sec. (EV3) in selective mode and 1 sec. (EV1) in full-area mode. Tri-X users may lose accuracy below Ve sec. at f/1.4 with selective readings and % sec. at f/1.4 for full-area readings. Individual cameras may make longer exposure—Leitz is conservative in its claims. Although not mentioned in the literature, the V LED was said by Leitz experts, at Photokina, to serve as a system-OK. They inferred that it would light in cases of sudden environmental changes—bringing your camera in from the cold into a warm room, for instance—until the circuits restabilized, or to warn of circuit malfunctions.

Next in line is ®, for aperture-preferred, selective-area metering. In this particularly useful mode, exposures are based on a 7-mm-diameter area in the center of the viewing screen and are essentially flare-free. Lens focal length has little or no effect on metering accuracy; the reading area is accurately defined by the measuring circle. Measuring angles are 80° with a 50mm, 40° with a 100mm and a mere 10° with a 400mm Telyt.

Although there would seem to be little point in putting exposure override into a spot reading—it’s almost always possible to find a middle-toned subject area with a selective meter—it is nevertheless possible to use the override control with the spot-metering mode if desired. More importantly, the exposure for the selected area can be read and held by a slight pressure on the shutter release button while the subject is reframed for shooting. Couple this eminently logical and convenient exposure “freeze” with a zoom lens such as the 75-to-200mm Telyt and you can zoom into the subject, hold the reading, recompose as desired and take your exposure without losing the reading. According to Leitz, the memory holds for 30 sec. We found it to last over 5 min. and the LED still didn’t relight! The shutter-speed-indicating LEDs continue to register light level changes— tending to shake our confidence that the readings were indeed locked, but also dispelling a false sense of security that light levels at the subject had not changed. With the R-3, the needle dropped during exposure freeze, so we were sure the reading was locked but we had to rely on observation of the subject to see whether light levels had changed. In either case, letting up on, and then depressing the release again served to update our readings. There's no question that this is the fastest working method of getting accurate exposures of contrasty, or backlit subjects. It certainly knocks the socks off the best handheld spot meters when shooting in tricky light.

Next on our guided tour of the R-4 finder, we come to [a], the center-weighted, general-purpose, wide-open reading, aperture-preferred system many of us are used to. The R-4, in full-area modes, is two stops more sensitive than in spot modes (including manual exposure obtainable only with selective metering). Exposure override is the route to making creative exposure changes here. The exposure lock feature is not available and would be largely irrelevent in full-area metering. In any event, you can set the R-4’s override to increments finer than half a stop and it’s easy to see in dim light. However we judge that the XD-11 ’s combined setting and release lever is quicker to use under pressure. Yes, you can override selective-area readings if you wish also, but we tend to use overrides with full-area metering and prefer to use the exposure lock when metering selectively.

The R-4’s override works uniformly in all modes but flash, so that you can shift freely from manual through all the exposure modes without having to reset your controls. This makes sense—overrides are determined by subject characteristics and should hold constant for any metering method based on reflected light. You can’t forget you’re set for override—that flashing V LED lets you know what’s awry in all modes. We used full-area, aperture-preferred metering when we were in a hurry and our subjects were normal in tone.

In manual mode (denoted by a 0 on the mode control and in the finder), you’re reading a 7mm-diameter area in the center of the screen. The metering system works normally, indicating the suggested shutter speed along the right side of the finder. When two adjacent diodes light, the recommended speed lies between—and, of course, cannot be set manually because of the discrete shutter-speed intervals most camera manufacturers seem convinced are necessary in the manual mode. Anyway, bracketing in manual at half-stop intervals requires first matching the indicated and manual shutter speeds (readable in M and shutter-preferred modes in a window at the right bottom of the viewing screen), then bracketing with the aperture setting (as indicated in a another window just to the left of the shutter speed by reflection from the aperture scale). In so doing, the shutter speed indicating LED will jump up and down, so you must remember to look at the manual speed window to keep track of your exposures. It’s slightly less unwieldy to do than to describe. Flash automation and exposure override continue to function in the manual metering mode, by the way.

In the next mode, programmed automatic-denoted by a [p], the R-4 selects both the shutter speed and the aperture simultaneously so that shutter speeds increase first to minimize risk of camera or subject motion, and then apertures and speeds increase together. At ASA 400, using an f/1.4 lens, the program runs from 1/8 at f/1.4 to 1/100 at f/11 (see table below). Above and below these light levels, the need for a change is indicated by the flashing of the appropriate exposure arrowhead. As a precautionary reminder, shutter speeds below 1/15 sec. do not appear on the finder readout here, though slower speeds may be set and timed. Program mode is for rank beginners just getting into the field and for pros harried enough to forego personal control. In P mode, the aperture preset (the smallest on each lens) and the shutter speed selected can be read out. The actual aperture set is not indicated. This mode is particularly useful for fastbreaking situations demanding full attention just to capture those "decisive moments.” In most cases, the program chooses the same speed/aperture combinations that a pro would use for the vast majority of pictures.

Next, we come to [t] mode for time, or shutter-speed priority—denoted by a [T|. In this mode you get the shutter to the speed desired, the lens to its smallest aperture, and shoot away. The R-4 meters the whole picture field, sets the correct aperture for your preselected speed and displays it on the LED aperture panel that now replaces the shutter-speed indicator usually in view along the right-hand finder edge. This mode allows you to keep your shutter speed constant to minimize camera and subject movement.

Like the XD-11, the R-4 even corrects your mistakes. For example, suppose you’ve selected 1/250 sec. as your working speed, and the light drops so that your widest aperture is not wide enough. Your aperture indication has been dropping down the scale as the light decreases . . . then it disappears and is replaced by an arrowhead pointing downward just below the aperture scale. This means you have exceeded the diaphragm range available and will have to reset your shutter speed. Should you neglect to heed its advice, the camera will reset itself automatically as needed. Like the XD-11, the camera will not indicate the speed it’s selected. If you want to know what it’s doing, you’ll have to change the speed manually until you get an aperture indication to know whether it was hand-holdable. Oh well—you can’t have everything. The R-4 will make the best it can of a bad situation. The only thing you can do that it can’t is to decide deliberately to underexpose (in manual mode) rather than risk camera movement.

One more exposure program is built in, and that’s dedicated flash. The R-4 will take any dedicated flash that will work with a Minolta X-series SLR, which includes Minol-tas, Vivitars, Sunpaks, Brauns and Bogens so far. No doubt others will appear. When any one of them is plugged into the R-4’s very solidly made and attached accessory shoe, it makes contact with the R-4 circuitry. When the flash is turned on with any exposure program selected, even manual, the top arrowhead will pulse when the unit’s recharged, then the indicator will blank out as a signal that the camera has automatically set itself to the 1/100-sec. sync, speed. Fire the flash, and the shutter reverts to its available-light setting until the flash is ready again. Note that you must set the lens aperture manually.

The R-4’s look of off-the-film flash exposure automation is the only area in which it lags behind the competition. We noticed, with curiosity, space for an additional contact reserved in the R-4’s hot shoe, and can only speculate that future Rs may have even more flash automation.

Think we’re done with the finder? Not yet—some of these mode-indicating diodes perform other tasks as well. When they glow steadily, everything is copasetic (or A-OK if you prefer). When they begin to flash on and off, they're warning you of errors you may have made. In both aperture-preferred modes, they have only one function. In T mode, a flashing diode indicates that you have forgotten to set your lens to the minimum aperture necessary to get full aperture adjustability and that the camera system will have to make exposure compromises within the shortened aperture range available to it. Exposures will be correct, but your shutter speeds may be nowhere near what you had in mind. Remember, the camera starts altering shutter speeds as soon as it runs out of diaphragm range. By setting a wider-than-minimum aperture you've shortened the range available—therefore ... QED. An interesting option is opened up, however. Suppose you wanted to avoid using small stops in order to fuzz out a background slightly. You could set f/8 and go aperture-preferred, or you could go time-preferred at f/8 and work between maximum aperture and f/8, keeping as close as possible to your desired speed. It’s an option that bears experimentation. The maximum automatic shutter speed of the camera will still limit your ability to lose background sharpness in bright light.

In P mode, the P diode flashes if you've forgotten to stop down fully, for the same reasons. If you fail to set f/16, ignoring the pulsating warning beacon, the camera will again operate within that portion of the program permitted by the aperture set. If you are at f/8, for example, only that the part of the program between f/8 and the maximum aperture of the lens will be work. Light levels calling for stops smaller than f/8 will increasingly overexposed. So pay attention to your P's cues.

Shifting our attention to the front of the camera, we find an 8-sec. electronic self-timer (ours ran 9.6 sec.) which flashes a red LED in the front right of the prism housing above the "C” in Leica. Two seconds before the exposure is made, the LED glows steadily as a warning to smile. The self-timer can be switched back to zero in the middle of a timed interval without damage, and can be overriden with the shutter release if desired.

Just above it, on the right side of the mirror box is the same generous and easy-working diaphragm stop-down lever for depth-of-field preview found on the R3. Note that in T (shutter preferred) and P modes, when the lens must be set to f/16 or f/22 to operate, that is exactly what you’ll get when you preview depth of field. If you want to preview at a given stop here, you will have to set the lens to it first, then return to f/16, etc. before exposing. The diode will flash to remind you, of course. This is a limitation shared by other shutter-preferred cameras, including the XD-11 and Canon AE-1. Since the R-4 does not require a lock on the diaphragm for this mode (the LED signal renders it unnecessary), it is easier to use than the competition even here.

The ribbed metal bayonet-lens lock-release lever sits right next to the self-timer where it serves as an index point to the raised red dot Leica bayonet-mount lenses have always featured. Line up the dot with the release, insert the lens, twist 45° clockwise and your lens is mounted solidly in the same heavily chromed, solidly mounted, brass bayonet mount used in the R-3, SL-2, SL, and the original Leicaflex. The solidity and durability of these mounts have been with us since the introduction of the M-3 and need little further comment. The R-4 takes, without modification, all lenses made or modified for the R-3—at latest count 30 in number, spanning the range from 15mm to 800mm. Noteworthy in the lens mount design is the lack of delicate pins and levers on the lens bases, so lenses may be set down without back caps with relative impunity.

The right side of the mirror box carries a single female PC connector for studio and handle-mount electronic flashes. It is not recommended to use both shoe and PC guns simultaneously, though a Leica representative said it was regularly done with their other cameras without damage. Note that it is recommended that dedicated shoe mount flashes be switched off before mounting them. Failing to do so may result in damage to the camera circuitry—a hazard present to some degree with all dedicated hot-shoe cameras.

Pulling up on the rewind knob releases the swinging, removable camera back with its foam-padded, film cartridge viewing port, long pressure plate, and stabilization guides. Spring pressure is high enough to make accidental opening almost impossible. Opening the back reveals a straightforward, well-machined film race with weil-polished guide rails. The film track is claimed to be shallower than that of the R-4, yielding greater film flatness and stability. The well-finished Seiko focal-plane shutter moves vertically with great smoothness and quietness, and has now been strengthened to permit use at4-fps motor drive speeds. The mechanism has been tested for over 100,000 frames.

The design of the Leitz-originated, Minolta-adapted take-up spool is excellent. Its tabs are white for easy visibility, and their grip on the film leader tenacious, yet it's fast and easy to load. Loading the camera with or without the winder was positive and quick. We noted that the back was directly interchangeable with XD-11 backs, including the Minolta Data Back D which seems the basis for the Leitz’ Data Back (not available for our tests). The Leitz backs feature a contoured film guide lacking in the Minolta equivalents—probably in an attempt to improve film flatness. The rectangular finder eyepiece is recessed enough to keep it from picking up grease from eyelashes, yet is easy to clean.
Viewfinder magnification is a nominal 0.85X, and the finder shows 92% of the negative format exposed. Next to the eyepiece, on the left, is a flattened, ribbed disk coupled to an eyepiece blind with the same white warning circle as that of the Minolta X series. The design of the knob makes it harder to turn the blind into position accidentally than the lever on the XD. Viewfinder accessories include push-on eyepiece-correction lenses and a periscopic right-angle eyepiece with adjustable diopter.

Upending the camera, we find three gold-plated contacts for motor and winder use, a screw-in battery compartment for two S76 batteries or the equivalent (with a neat hole to tell us whether a battery’s inside or not), an '/4-in.-deep 'A x 20 tripod socket, large rewind release and double-exposure release knob and a recessed, countersunk female splined connector for the winder and motor. Just forward of the tripod socket, a single gold contact is set into the mirror box. Mounting a winder or motor pushes this contact in, bypassing the camera battery so that the whole system runs off the relatively huge energy capacity of the AA cells of the motor drive battery pack.
Proceeding to the Motor Winder R4, we find, not surprisingly, spring-loaded gold-plated winder contacts, locating pins, and motor-drive coupling to mate with the camera itself. The winder features a unique coreless motor with an unusual rubber, variable-pitch coupling that matches the drive power to the friction of the film cartridge in use. The motor housing is of die-cast aluminum, with a reinforced tripod socket inset into the bottom for rigid tripod mounting. The wider front carries an extra camera release for high-speed continuous firing (2 fps) an extra front-mounted ’.A x 20 socket for the handgrip (which has its own continuous release), and a lever that releases the six-AA-cell battery pack to slide out for battery interchange or remote use. On the bottom, there’s an extension for the rewind release lever, which can be switched for motor-driven multiple-exposure use, and a folding captive screw to fix the winder firmly to the R-4 itself. A clever tripod adapter engages in both the front and bottom 'A x 20 sockets to provide a doubly-strong, forwardextending platform to permit better balance with long telephotos and zooms on a tripod. In the back, a screw cap can be removed to expose a five-contact female socket for screw-in remote-release cables and the RC Leica R remote-control unit. Up to 100 ft. of cable can be used for remote tripping with either switching device. An infrared relay or a radio transmitter can also be used. The RC Leica R is an elegant unit featuring LED frame readout so you can keep track of the film supply in your remote camera (up to 99 frames). Users of the announced but not tested 250-frame backs will have to keep track in 99-frame increments. A two-speed interval-ometer is built in that will time intervals from 0.5 sec. to 10 min. for time-lapse sequences. It can also be used as a long-interval delayed-action release for up to 10 min., and for making multiple exposures orr a single frame.

Just to complete the picture, an audible beeper lets you know if you’ve left the motor in multi-exposure mode every time you depress any of the shutter releases.

In use, the winder was commendably smooth and quiet. The solidity of its construction inspired confidence. It is fairly heavy— containing six AA batteries instead of the customary four—so that use of the handgrip would seem desirable both for physical comfort and its relocation of the series release more conveniently to the camera top.

While we found its 2-frames-per-sec. speed nothing to write home about, the winder's smooth operation and quietness made it particularly unobtrusive. We also felt that a more positive lock on the battery compartment would be helpful; in handling the camera there was a tendency for the battery compartment to come loose and slide out. A piece of tape would be good insurance for the active photographer. It is claimed that 150 36-exposure rolls can be exposed with six alkaline batteries, so this shouldn’t be much of an imposition. The serial release on the grip can be locked so inadvertent exposure of a whole roll can be avoided. Without the grip, the series release is exposed but slightly recessed so that accidents are unlikely. The top shutter release of the camera is not protected, though, and a steady pressure from being packed in a soft bag could depress the release long enough to light one or two LEDs and exhaust the battery, as it can with an XD-11. Pack with care to avoid this risk.

In spite of the R-4 winder’s instruction that camera batteries must be in the camera to get an exposure impulse while the rest of the camera ran off the winder or motor batteries, we found the camera to operate perfectly with the winder (no motor was available for testing) with no batteries in the camera at all. It would be possible, therefore, to remove all camera batteries, pack the camera with the winder or motor attached and the battery pack snapped out and completely avoid the risk of inadvertent battery drain. The winder operates flawlessly with 36-exposure rolls, turning off automatically when the camera winder lever turns off the motor and allows manual winding—we were able to shoot one or two extra exposures per roll after the motor turned off. While the manual recommends use of 36-exposure rolls with the winder or motor, we shot 20s without damage to the film. At the end of the roll, a clutch slips, causing the motor to click repeatedly. If you don’t stop shooting promptly a thermal relay turns off the motor. To get started, just pull the battery pack slightly out and then re-engage it.

The 4-frame-per-sec. motor drive was not available for testing. It is scarcely bigger than the winder, being only slightly higher to enable it to take 10 AA batteries in its slide-in compartment. Frame rates of 1, 2 and 4 fps are selected by a sliding switch on the front. Rewind with both is manual. Both share remote control and external battery pack options for sustained cold-weather use, and both are made by Eumig, known for premium quality motor-driven movie cameras.

Remove the R-4's lens and you’ll see that the mirror box is well blackened (but not ribbed), and a complex lever system provides smooth and precise mirror control. Interchangeable screens are inserted by self-locking spring-loaded tweezers and held by a three-point system for focusing accuracy. The multicoated reflex mirror is generous in size to minimize long lens image cutoff, and the front of the camera is built out to accommodate the 3.4mm-longer back-focus of Leicaflex lenses. Hinged to the mirror is a glittering, multifaceted Fresnel mirror that reflects a maximum of light to the silicon photodiode in the camera bottom. In all metering modes but A, aperture-preferred selective, and m (manual), the cell leads the full area of the Fresnel screen. In sppt-metering modes, an f/1.1, 45mm focal length lens slides in front of the cell to confine its reading to the 7mm circle at the screen’s center. Selectivity and sharpness of cutoff are well-handled.

Leitz does not itself make a dedicated flash to work with the R-4. Braun 370 and 340 units with the relevant SCA R-3 adapters can be used, as can Minolta’s 118X and 320X, the Vivitar 3500 and Sunpak 422B with Minolta modules have been tested and OK'd by Leitz. Turn off all falsh units before inserting in hot shoe to insure safety of camera electronics.

When all is said and done, the R-4 pretty well justifies Leitz’s claim—it is a camera that can simply do everything—or almost everything, anyway. While explaining its many options may seem confusing, in practice it is simple and straightforward to use. The system of diodes provides comprehensive and comprehendible information as to what’s happening, exposure readouts are fast-acting and not confusing, and the clean-cutting spot reading in combination with on-the-shutter-button exposure “hold" provides great potential accuracy with unsurpassed convenience.

The international meld of Asian electronics with German optics and mechanics has resulted in a professional-grade camera that even a beginner can feel at home with.

Included with the R4 was the latest Wetz-lar-made 50mm f/1.4 Summilux-R. The lens is large on the more compact R4 body, a bit heavy, protruding 2 in. with its collapsible sunshade in closed position, is 2 in. in diameter and taking 55mm screw-in filters. As would be expected in a German-made lens of this calibre, mount construction and smoothness of focusing were superb. A silky 270° turn of the '/г in. ribbed focusing ring takes one from infinity to the 20 in. near focusing distance. Bright yellow English and white metric and aperture figures are engraved very legibly. A short telescoping shade is coupled with the deeply recessed front element to give good protection from sidelight.

Optical bench analysis; In the center of the image field at f/1.4, we saw slight flare and slight spherical aberration, but by f/2.8 it was virtually gone. By f/5.6, the pattern was nearly perfect, approaching diffraction limited performance. Off-axis, wide open, we saw very slight astigmatism and slight purple-yellow flare. By f/5.6, these aberrations were greatly reduced, and gone by f/11. A very slight trace of lateral color was observed throughout. Field test slides: In our field test transparencies, we found flare to be well controlled throughout, with only small, weak ghosts in evidence even in pictures shot against the sun. Wide open, contrast was moderate, but by f/2.8 results were contrasty across the picture field. As with most high speed lenses, pictures shot at maximum aperture showed good detail but there was a slight softness. (November 1981)


