The Casca I 
Well you could say that it has very few features. Only six shutter speeds are available, from 1/25 to 1/1000, so there are no slow speeds. There is a B setting but no provision for a cable release. There is no flash synchronisation and no rangefinder. It has interchangeable lenses but you will need the accessory viewfinder when using them. Really it is basically just a very solid scale-focusing 35mm camera. 


Casca I with accessory viewfinder for 3.5, 8.5 and 13.5 lenses


showing the back panel styling

Priced in the USA at $320 it was quite expensive at the time, around the same price bracket as a Leica. Or you could have bought a Kine-Exakta for $279, an SLR camera that offered far more features. Interestingly in 1948 USA a good new car cost about $1800. You could buy a Rolleiflex for $265, a 4x5 Speed Graphic for $249 and the new Polaroid 95 camera sold for $95. So the Casca I wouldn’t have been easy to sell. When the Casca II came onto the market soon afterwards it was better priced at $285.

The Casca I lenses attach via a 37mm bayonet mount and have a gear-toothed ring, which engages a gear wheel in the mount that rotates via another in the round housing on the front plate, which you use for focusing.

The standard lens is a Culminar 5cm f2.8. Two other Culminar lenses were offered, an 8.5cm f2.8 and a 13.5cm f4.5, as well as a 3.5cm f4.5 Orthostigmat.


Geared lens mount on Casca I


Focusing wheel on Casca I

The film advance knob also serves as a rewind knob when lifted and a smaller knob by the shutter release is moved to engage rewind, a feature that involves a complex set of gears. There is a swing-out foot on the base to enable the camera to stand level. Two buttons on the base need to be moved to first unlock and then open the back.


Common to both models are a focal-plane shutter with speeds set by a sliding bar on the rear, a top-hinged fully opening back, tripod socket, accessory shoe and fine leather covering. Also an individual lens mount that is not interchangeable between models and was never used by any other maker.