Following Fujica's ST series of SLRs is the Fujica AZ-1 — yet another compact 35mm sLr, but with a difference. The Ai-1 is Fujica's only aperture-priority semi-automatic camera. The ST605, ST705 and ST801 are (mechanical) shutter-priority semi-automatics. The ST901 is a fully automatic SLR with a limited manual override facility.

The next logical step was to make an aperture-priority semiautomatic SLR with a continuously variable electronic shutter — the AZ-1. It is sort of a half-step "down" from the ST901 model. Whereas the ST901 has continuously variable (electronically controlled) shutter speeds from about 20sec to 1/1000sec, and a fully automatic diaphragm, the AZ-1 has continuously variable (electronically controlled) shutter speeds from £-1/1000 sec through an aperture manually chosen by the photographer. In addition, the AZ-1 has manual shutter speeds of 1/1000sec, 1/250sec, 1/60sec
and B, ±2 stops override on the aE (automatic exposure) setting.

I suppose it's nice to be able to choose manual shutter speeds on a semi-automatic camera, but if they are limited to only three speeds (plus B), what's the point? You might as well stick to a purely aperture-priority camera with no facility for manual shutter speeds if the alternative is only a choice of three anyway. And since you can choose to select a . .2, . . 1 , -1 or -2/ stops override (while on the AE setting) why would you use a manual speed when the camera can do the "work" for you ? Except, of course, to let the camera function with failed batteries.

The AZ-1 is marginally smaller and lighter than the ST901. It has the same standard 55mm f/1.8 lens as the ST705, ST80I and ST901. The only apparent disadvantages of the AZ-1 compared to its older brother, the ST901, is its more limited shutter speed range, its lack of the fully automatic facility and a series of red LED dots indicating shutter speeds in the viewfmder compared with the digital LED shutter speed display in the ST901's viewfinder. The AZ-1's advantage over the ST901, however, is a saving in the order of about £40 (and size and weight).

HANDLING

The AZ-1 is comfortable enough to hold (it would be more so for someone with smaller hands than mine). A curious trait is that focusing is sharper in the viewfinder if my eye is not right up to the viewfinder rearsight. The AZ-1 comes with a rubber eye-piece and if it is just touching my eyebrow then focusing is sharp, but if I press the camera a bit closer, then the viewfinder image becomes blurred.

Another slightly annoying characteristic is the virtually non-existent wind-on lever stand-off position. Only the minimum stand off angle is permitted by the hinged plastic-tip of the lever wind. When shooting quickly, some shots are "lost" because the shutter won't fire unless the lever wind is allowed to fully return. This fully returned position leaves practically no room to keep my thumb behind the lever, ready to wind on quickly after the shot is taken. To remedy this situation, either Fujica will have to design their lever winds for more stand-off angle, or put more space between the pentaprism/view-finder rearsight and lever wind. Sports photographers will not find this an easy camera to use quickly and surely.

Perhaps those who like to pretend that they are sports photographers will like the AZ-1, because (for about £90 extra) you can get the Fujica Auto Winder. This will overcome the fast shooting and winding-on problem; it will wind-on for you at the rate of about two frames a second (depending on the light level if shooting on the AE setting). But the auto winder also adds about 274g (10oz without batteries) to the weight of the camera and a fair bit of noise, too. No sports photographer wants more weight if he/she can help it. The question we all must ask ourselves is: Would you pay about £90 for something which you can do for free with your thumb?

Focusing is really easy with the AZ-1. It has a big bright focusjng screen, mostly ground glass with a horizontally split centre-spot surrounded by a large microprism collar. However, the rear-sight could be a little larger for my liking; spectacle wearers will no doubt find difficulty in seeing all four corners at the same time. When fitted with the rubber eye-cup there is a problem in seeing all four corners simultaneously. And it even further limits the space between the viewfinder rear-sight and lever wind.

Film speeds can be set from 25 3200ASA easily by pulling up the shutter speed dial on the top plate. The depth ot field preview button on the tront of the body is in a good position right under your right middle finger and is lightly sprung for easy operation, but it does not lock. But then, there's not often the need for a lock. The lens also has the usual depth of fiela scale but with a colour coding — f/1 6 is marked in blue on the lens, f/11 in yellow, f/8 in green, f/5.6 white, f/4 red, and the rest in white. The depth of field lines are marked on the top ot the lens barrel in the colour corresponding to the f/stop numbers. This is a good idea since the lines are so close together.

If you want to use the 8sec delayed-action shutter release timer, push its lever down and then press the little chrome button which is then revealed — then "get the lead out" to join the group. If you also want to use the timer to shoot a picture of, say, a close-up subject when the light(s) are behind the camera, you can still use the AE setting, as long as you tit the viewfinder rear-sight cap. If you don't, the light entering the viewfinder will prejudice the light reading and you may get an underexposed picture.

IN THE VIEWFINDER

While using the camera manually, selecting your own aperture and shutter speed, you can see none of the settings in the viewfinder frame. However, while using the AE setting you will see a red LED dot light up alongside the shutter speed which the camera has chosen to use along with your chosen aperture. Speeds indicated by the dots are 1/100-1/30sec. i he dot may also appear flashing next to the "2-15" notation, indicating that the shutter speed is from i-l/15sec — too slow for most people for a hand-held exposure with a standard lens. If, however, the dot is alongside the 1/10u0sec mark and is flasning, then the shutter speed ot i/1000sec is not fast enough; you should close down the aperture until the dot stops flashing.

You cannot, however, close down the aperture hoping the dot will stop flashing //you've still got your digit on the shutter button, bnghtly depressing the shutter button switches on the meter, and the camera then "locks on" to a selected shutter speed.

It will not re-read the scene or change its mind about the shutter speed it's chosen, unless you let up on the shutter button. So it does have a memory.

Take a beach scene with a pretty girl, who you want to shoot contre-jour. Using the AE setting (and the camera's memory), you could point the camera at your hand, slightly depress the shutter button to "lock" the exposure setting, raise the camera and shoot. Or you could use the +2 f/stop override setting alongside the AE setting on the shutter speed dial. Both ways will work.

But take a bike race situation. You're standing at a curve in the track where the bike goes from bright sunshine into the shade of trees on- the corner. If you depress the shutter button when the bike is still in the sun and shoot when the bike is in the shade, you'll get an under-exposed shot, because the camera has remembered the setting for when the bike was in the sun. So when shooting in this type of situation, you'll have to wait for the subject to reach the place where you want to picture it and only then press the shutter release.

Having the meter switch in the shutter button is a good idea, but I'm not so convinced about the advantages of the meter having a memory as we/1 as the :f 2 stop override facility in the camera's design. Neither the memory or the ±2 stop override facility will help the sports photographer very often. Yet both this override and the memory seem to duplicate functions for the photographer favouring the contre-jour shooting situation. Alternatively, I would have preferred to see a continuously changing shutter speed readout (via the LED dots) along with the ±2 stop override on the AE facility.

Since depressing the shutter release button also turns onthe meter, the shutter button has a locking collar tab. Loading film is quite easy on the six-slot take-up spool, but the rubber eye-cup hinders the back from opening slightly (if it's fitted). Winding on and rewinding are both smooth operations.

SHOULD BE POPULAR

The performance of the standard 55mm f/1.8 lens was very good; however, the performance of the 43—75mm f/3.5-4.5 zoom lens (an alternative) wasn't very good. It's focal length range doesn't really extend far enough in each direction for it to be much more useful than the standard 55mm lens and it's also much "slower" at f/3.5.

Shutter speedson the sample weren't very good when faster than about 1/125sec; the 1/500sec and 1/1000sec speeds were outside the relevant British Standard. But then the sample we had for review was one of only 10 in the country at the time and was a preproduction model. Production models will no doubt be more accurate.

The Fujica AZ-1 is a nice-looking camera; it's small, relatively light (but a bit heavier than other "compact" SLRs) and is semi-automatic. It's easy to get used to and to use. Fujicas also tend to stand up very well to wear and tear and the "test" of time. I'd rather have this AZ-1 than other compacts I could think of, as it feels more sturdy and business-like. It should become quite popular with those who like semi-automatic compact SLRs.

BY REX HAYMAN
