CANON EOS 620: AF SLR for Pros?

MANUFACTURERS SPECIFICATIONS: Canon EOS 620 autofocus 35mm single-lens reflex camera. Body No.1180485. LENS: 50mm f/1.8 EF Canon in Canon EF bayonet mount. SHUTTER:Electronic, vertical travel Canon metal blade focal plane with speeds from 30 to 1/4000 sec. plus В, X sync at 1/250 sec. EXPOSURE SYSTEMS: Segmented silicon photo cell above eyepiece reads evaluative or central limited-area metering pattern (with AE lock), for shutter priority, aperture priority, fixed and shiftable program autoexposure modes, plus metered manual exposure. Second SPD in bottom of mirror box provides centerweighted, off-the-film readings for TTL autoflash. EV range 1-20. AUTOFOCUS: Focus-priority (single shot) AF or continuous (servo) AF using TTL phase detection with Canon BASIS sensor in bottom of mirror box, audible focus OK signal, EV 1-18. FLASH: Five-pin dedicated hot shoe provides TTL flash off film surface with aperture and shutter speed predetermined by nearinfrared pre-exposure flash when using 420/300EZ Canon flashes. VIEWFINDER: Fixed eye-level prism with user-changeable finder screens. Standard screen has central autofocus rectangle, indicating circle for limited-area metering and full-area manual focus. LED-lit LCD display shows shutter speed, aperture, metered manual exposure level. AE lock symbol, manual exposure Indicator, flash ready, exposure compensation, autofocus indication, out-of-exposure and flash-range warning signals. OTHER FEATURES: LCD on top plate displays shooting mode, film wind mode, AF mode, shutter speed aperture, film speed, battery check, auto bracketing and multiple exposure readouts. Auto DX film speed setting ISO 25-5000, manual ISO &-6400, auto load, auto wind, auto rewind, single and sequence film advance, electronic selftimer with LED, depth-of-field preview, mid-roll rewind, audible camera shake warning, provision for accessory data and command backs, interchangeable grips with or without remote terminal. BATTERIES: All power supplied by single 6-volt lithium battery. PRICE: $819 with 50mm f/1.8.

In designing the EOS 620, an autofocus (AF) SLR aimed primarily at knowledgeable photographers and pros, Canon devised a disarmingly simple and effective strategy—integrate an array of useful (and tempting) advanced features into the basic EOS 650. However, constructing a pro caliber machine using the same chassis, electronics, in-lens micromotors and AF system as the broad-spectrum model can be risky. Fortunately, in testing, analyzing, and disassembling the EOS 650 (see Modern Photography's Modern Tests, July 1987, page 50) we found its overall performance to be at least as good as any of its similar AF
competitors, and we were equally impressed with its rugged, die-cast metal chassis, huge, sturdy, all-electronic lens mount and excellent ergonomics. Based on our hands-on experience and analysis of the EOS 650, we expect that its fraternal twin, the EOS 620, will stand up very well indeed to the rigors and the requirements of professional use.

In appearance, the EOS 620 and 650 are so nearly identical that it's tough to tell them apart without glancing at their nameplates. Both feature the same large, distinctively modern, polycarbonate-clad outer bodies, and both are somewhat lighter in weight than they look. Not surprisingly, the EOS 620 is beautifully balanced and extremely comfortable to hand hold—comments that apply equally to the 650. All controls on the 620 follow the same logical, straightforward pattern as those on the 650. In fact, the controls of both models are virtually identical. The sole exceptions: The 620 has an LCD-panel-illuminator button to the left of the partial (limited-area) metering button atop the thumb rest on the back, and some of its buttons provide, in combination, pro-oriented options not present or offered with the 650.

Since we've already covered the EOS 650 controls in punctilious detail in our July '87 Modern Tests report (available on request for $1.50 including postage and handling from Modern's Reader Service Department), we needn't duplicate that elaborate description here. Herewith an abbreviated rundown for those who may not be familiar with the EOS system. To the left of the 620's eyepiece is the knurled main switch, which has four check-stopped positions; L for shutter-locked, power off, green rectangle for basic program setting only. A or beep symbol for power on and mode selection available, with or without audible warnings.

Dial in one of the last two settings and you can change exposure modes by pressing the Mode button while turning the large, milled Input Dial behind the angled shutter release atop the removable handgrip. All settings (including exposure and AF mode, single or continuous film wind, frame number, aperture and shutter speed) are displayed on the large, clear LCD panel to the right of the pentaprism. Press the smooth electromagnetic release and these last two exposure settings are displayed for eight seconds on the LCD and in the finder below the screen in greenish LED-transilluminated digits. Finder readouts are more limited than those appearing on the LCD, but they also include a focus OK LED, manual exposure mode M, partial metering star and a 2 sign to warn if the exposure compensation has been set to a value other than zero.

The 620’s metering and autofocus systems are likewise the same as those in the basic model 650. To recap, both cameras provide evaluative, multi-pattern readings in all autoexposure modes by measuring light values for six separate zones off the focusing screen, analyzing them and then setting the exposure based on algorithms (patterns) stored in the camera's memory. This system is quite effective in automatically compensating for common exposure problems such as variable light and backlit subjects, and many variations in reflectivity or lighting that might ordinarily lead to underexposures or overexposures.

To cope with the small percentage of situations (about three to four percent according to our tests) where the evaluative system can be fooled, and to provide EOS users with a convenient, comprehensive method of manual exposure control, Canon has wisely included another metering option—partial metering. Switch to metered manual mode, or hold in the partial metering button atop the thumb rest with the metering system turned on (in any AE mode but "green rectangle" program-only mode) and you'll get partial (limited-area or semi-spot) metering, with the meter's sensitivity concentrated in the central 6.5 percent of the picture area. To make things simpler, the partial metering button also locks in the reading as long as you hold it in, so you can achieve the benefits of metered manual control without switching out of any of the autoexposure (AE) modes—aperture- preferred (AV), shutter- preferred (TV) or Programmed autoexposure (P).

Manual metering with the 620 works exactly the same as with the 650. Switch to M mode and change shutter speeds by turning the input dial. Once you’ve selected a shutter speed, press the M button at the bottom of the left-hand lens surround while turning the input dial to change apertures (in half stops) until you see the "oo" (correct exposure) symbol in the finder. Canon made an astute decision in having both EOSs switch to partial metering when you select manual mode— that's precisely when you need to know exactly what your metering system is measuring,

So far there would seem to be precious little difference between the two EOS models, but open the magnetically locked switch cover below the hinged back and that impression will shortly change. Like the 650, the 620 has four buttons inside the switch compartment, all of which control less-often-used functions. From left to right, there’s a black mid-roll-rewind button, a yellowish AF mode button, a blue
wind mode/self-timer button and a black battery check button. Press the AF mode button while turning the Input dial and the panel on the lower left-hand part of the LCD changes from ONE SHOT (camera fires only if proper focus has been attained, locks shutter otherwise) to SERVO (camera continues to autofocus on moving subjects, shutter can be fired at any time). Do the same with the wind mode button, and the readout in the lower right-hand box of the LCD changes from S (single frame advance) to C (continuous advance at up to three frames per second) to self-timer (denoted by a clock face). Press the last two buttons at once and the ISO setting is displayed above the AF mode box for eight seconds, and you can change it by turning the input dial during that time. Press the fourth (black) button opposite a battery symbol and “be" plus a series of dashes (three for full power) appears on the LCD.

So far, everything is just as it is on the 650, but the legend on the inner switch cover of the 620 has something not found on the 650—a line, marked AEB, connecting the AF mode and battery check button graphics. What is the mysterious AEB that you get when you press both these buttons? Automatic exposure bracketing, settable in increments from half a stop to five full stops!

Here's how it works. Set any speed but В (bulb) and any mode but program only (green rectangle) and when you press both aforementioned buttons, AEB 0.0 appears in the middle of the LCD for eight seconds. Turn the input dial to change the 0.0 to any value between 0.5 and 5.0; and that's the amount of variation (in exposure steps or EV values) you get between your bracketed exposures. For example, set the AEB to 1.0 and press the shutter release and the 620 will fire off a three-exposure sequence of "one stop under, correct metered exposure, and one stop over" in about a second (at normal hand-
held shutter speeds) and then clear itself for normal shooting.

If the camera's set for one-shot AF mode the camera must attain focus before it fires an AEB sequence, but the original focus point is locked in regardless of the AF mode you've set. You needn't set the wind mode to C (continuous wind) before firing an AEB sequence, and the system even works in M (manual exposure) mode and when using the partial metering AE lock button. However, it's not usable for flash photography. Yes, you can shoot a bracketed sequence with exposure compensation dialed in, but the correct exposure point will be shifted based on the amount and direction of the compensation set. With the aid of Canon's forthcoming Technical Back E, you'll be able to autobracket up to nine exposures in one-quarter step increments.

In our field tests of the 620, we found that the autobracketing feature performed flawlessly and was especially useful in situations where a range of possible exposures could all produce different but equally dramatic or pleasing effects (e.g., with scenics or architectural views). However, when setting a wide bracketing value it is possible to get a non-hand-holdable shutter speed for the overexposed frame, a fact not mentioned in the instructions. Right now there is only one other SLR with built-in autobracketing (the Contax 167 MT), but in our view AEB would definitely make a worthwhile addition to any SLR used primarily by pros and advanced photographers.

Another telltale sign of one of the 620’s pro-oriented capabilities is found next to the mode and exposure compensation buttons to the left of the pentaprism. It’s a little ME with connecting lines in-between the words MODE and EXP. COMP. Hold in both these buttons and a boxed ME, and a 1 appears at the bottom of the LCD. You're in multi-exposure mode. Hold the buttons in as you turn the input dial and you can set single digits up to 9, which, as you've probably guessed, is the maximum number of multiple exposures you can get on a single frame. As you press the shutter release for each successive exposure the ME biinks and the shutter recocks, but the film winds to the next frame and the frame counter advances only after the set number of exposures has been completed. The clear, comprehensive instruction booklet provides ballpark exposure-compensation settings and good tips on shooting multiple exposures.

Although it doesn't sound quite as exciting as autobracketing, the Canon 620's program shift function is probably the most important feature that's not present on the 650. Select P mode (except by turning the main switch to green rectangle position), and you can shift the program by simply holding the shutter release partway in as you turn the input dial. Indeed, you can get just about any available aperture or shutter speed you wish, so long as the combination will provide the proper metered exposure. You can even shift the program quite comfortably while pressing the AE lock/partial metering button!

When you need to select a specific shutter speed or aperture while you're shooting in the program mode, this is certainly a rather simple and elegant way to get it. You needn’t even take your eye away from the viewfinder since the settings in use are the ones displayed. Incidently, the Canon 620, like the 650, automatical/у alters its exposure program according to the lens focal length being used to favor hand-holdable shutter speeds. As the light level increases, only the shutter speed gets faster until it reaches about one over the focal length of the lens mounted (or the zoom focal length set). From that point on, the diaphragm stops down and the shutter speed gets faster in equal amounts as the measured light level increases.

Push the lock button and slide the latch on the 620's left-hand side, swing open the removable back and you'll see that its interior looks identical to the 650’s, which is to say beautifully finished with six gold-plated DX contacts in the film cartridge chamber and eight flat gold-plated contacts (for data and technical backs) to the right of the auto loading take-up drum. But there is something quite different right in the middle—the 620's shutter, a metal-blade vertical-travel unit that provides speeds of 30 seconds to 1/4000 second (settable in half-step increments) and X sync at up to 1/250 second. In comparison, the 650's metal-coated Mylar-blade shutter has a top speed of 1/2000 second and X syncs up to 1/125 second. Obviously, the faster top speed and especially the faster sync speed (which minimizes ghost images when shooting with flash in bright ambient light) are more in keeping with the requirements of advanced photographers.

Also present only on the 620 is the previously mentioned LCD panel illuminator button next to the AE lock/partial metering button. Press it and the large LCD panel is bathed in a jazzy blue electroluminescent glow and its readouts are clearly visible even in total darkness. The light turns itself off automatically after about eight seconds to conserve battery power. Final 620-only tidbit: It comes with the GR-20 grip with built-in remote control socket, an option on the 650.

One clever feature that's missing on the EOS 620 but present on the 650 is the Depth Mode, which automatically calculates and sets the optimum aperture and distance needed to sharply render near and far subjects. Obviously Canon felt that deleting this feature from the EOS 620 would not impose undue hardship on advanced photographers who fully comprehend the relationship among shooting aperture, focusing distance and depth of field. We agree.

In field testing the EOS 620, we found that its autofocusing performance 'was very good indeed, closely matching that of the 650 in terms of speed, precision, and the ability to focus in low light (down to EV 1) and with subjects of relatively low contrast. Although we are unable to quantify our observations (there is as yet no generally accepted method or standardized procedure for testing comparative autofocusing performance) we are confident that the EOS 620 generally performs as well as the best of its competitors. We were particularly pleased with the sharp pictures we got when tracking fast-moving subjects (e.g., at a track and field meet and a motorcycle race) in servo AF mode.

Also deserving of praise are the extremely clear in-finder readouts, which manage to be unobtrusive yet always visible, and the clear, contrasty standard finder screen (there are presently seven others available), which is easy to focus with manually despite the absence of the usual focusing aids. Some staff members were less than enthusiastic about the nearly invisible circle defining the partial (limited-area) metering area (others felt a bolder one would be obtrusive) and all agreed that the autofocus brackets are too hard to see in dim light.

Overall handling of the EOS 620 is exemplary, aided by superbly ergonomic contours and thoughtfully placed controls. The EOS' manual focusing system is still the best on any AF SLR—full- sized, centrally placed focusing rings remain stationary in AF mode, and focus the lens only when you set the switch to M (manual focus) and turn them by hand. Manual focusing action is very smooth—perhaps a bit too smooth and underdamped. Even placing miniature focusing motors in each lens, as Canon has done with the EOS system, has not eliminated that niggling problem. It has, however, succeeded in creating the quietest autofocusing system in any SLR.

Perhaps the most remarkable thing about the EOS is that it succeeds so well at being a professional-level camera. It is, after all, not so much a kissing cousin of the EOS 650 as its somewhat more talented twin brother. Essentially, Canon has taken the brilliant and unprecedented step of designing a single camera that meets the needs of everyone from tyros to pros, then splitting it into two slightly divergent models. Opt for the EOS 650 and you get the same rugged chassis, big sturdy lensmount, bright, contrasty viewfinder, sophisticated metering system and motor drive for less money. Go for the 620 and you get all that along with program shift, autobracketing, multiexposure capability and a faster shutter plus all the user-friendly features found on so-called amateur cameras—auto loading, auto rewind, a program-only setting and a control system as simple and logical as that of any multimode SLR.

