MANUFACTURERS SPECIFICATIONS: Canon EOS 850. The only difference from described here EOS-750 is that EOS-850 doesn't have a built-in flash

LENS: Canon 50mm 1/1.8 No. 1015460 In Canon EF mount. 
FOCUSING: AF or manual. Focus priority AF using Canon basis (base-stored image sensor) TTL phase-detection system. AF lock. AF range EV 1-18. EOS 750: Focus-assist beam with range up to four maters (13.1 feet). 
LENSES: Interchangeable Canon EF lenses with integral AF motors, in Canon EF bayonet mount. 
SHUTTER: Electronically controlled vertical travel focal plane with speeds of 2-1/2000 second. X-sync at 1/60-1/125 second. 
FILM ADVANCE: Motor-driven, with continuous advance up to 1.3 fps. Single-frame advance in depth-AE mode. Auto-loading and prewind to end of roll. 
EXPOSURE SYSTEM: Program AE, depth-priority AE. Program adjusts continuously to lens focal length. SPD above eyepiece makes six-segment overall readings. EV 0-20 (at ISO 100, with f/1.4 lens). ISO 25-3200 for DX-codad film, non-coded film set to ISO 25. 
VIEWFINDER: Fixed eye-level prism. Non-inter-changeable laser-matte focusing screen has center AF brackets, fine-ground center circle, full manual-focus area. LED circle below image area glows for auto/manual focus OK, blinks If AF not possible. “P”-shaped LED glows for exposure OK/flash ready, blinks slowly for low-light warning/flash charging, blinks rapidly If exposure out of range. 
FLASH: SPD cell in mirror box for centerweighted off-the-film reading flash AE. Dedicated hot shoe for Canon EZ-series flash units. 
EOS 750: Built-In flash with focus-assist beam pops up and fires automatically In low light or backlight conditions. Flash retracts automatically after exposure. Guide number 39 (at ISO 100, In feet); covers field of view of 35mm lens; recycling time two seconds. Flash auto/off switch on camera body. 
OTHER FEATURES: Shutter lock; beeper for self-timer, focus-confirmation, battery check. EOS 750QD: Built-in data back with LCD panel; can imprint month/day/year or day/ hour/minute. Back is powered by a 3-volt lithium battery. 
BATTERY: One 6-volt 2CR5 lithium battery in removable handgrip. 
PRICE: EOS 750: Body only, $475; 50mm f/1.6 lens, $139. EOS 750OD: Body only, $525. EOS 850: Body only, $410. Speedllte 160E, $109.


The easiest way to design a lower-priced camera is by simplifying a htgh-end model. Following this strategy, Canon couid have taken the advanced-amateur EOS 650 and just pruned its wide range of capabilities to create an AF SLR for beginners. In fact, the EOS 750 (and the companion model 850) are the products of a successful "editing" process, but they also have been endowed with innovative features that should particularly endear them to first-time SLR users. Considerable attention has been paid to helping beginners avoid or compensate for typical mistakes they might make.

Both new models are full-fledged members of the EOS system, so they accept all Canon "EF" bayonet-mount lenses, and all Canon dedicated flash units, including the "EZ" series and the compact 160E. Equally important, they both employ the Canon BASIS (base-stored image sensor) AF system, which allows unusually fast, quiet and accurate AF operation, even in low light.

Before we discuss how these two new cameras work, here is the one significant difference between them: the 750 has a built-in flash and the 850 doesn't. (There is also a "QD" version of the 750, with a daterecording back.) For the sake of convenience, we will refer to the 750 throughout. Unless otherwise stated, all of our comments apply equally to the 850 as well.

Experienced EOS photographers will immediately notice that the 750 is more compact and lighter in weight than the 650. This is due, in part, to the 750’s less powerful motor drive, which advances film continuously at about 1.3 fps, compared with 3 fps for the 650. Also, the aluminum-alloy internal frame of the 650 body has been replaced by a composite plastic material. This moneysaving change is appropriate because users of the 750 are less likely to make full-aperture pictures with lenses that require the ultimate in lens-mount-to-film-plane parallelism. In any case, we achieved excellent results with the 50mm lens, even wide-open at f/1.8.

The 750 has a very comfortable, matte-finished handgrip that’s well contoured for easy holding. Another contoured area on the back helps your palm find the right place, and naturally guides your thumb to the top-deck wheel that controls virtually all camera functions. Finally, a nearby groove leads your pointer finger to the large, round shutter-release button. Because of this excellent ergonomic design, plus a simple control layout, the 750 is a breeze to use one-handed.

After loosening a slotted knob on the side of the body, you remove the outer portion of the handgrip to reveal the battery compartment. One 6-volt 2CR5 lithium battery provides juice for everything, including the flash. Canon claims the battery will last for 40 24-exposure rolls at room temperature with a normal 50mm f/1.8 lens, using flash 30 percent of the time. No harm is done if you accidentally insert the battery upside down, although nothing works until the error is corrected.

Pressing down a slider switch on the left side of the camera body causes the back to pop open. Now you can see the film-cassette compartment, which is well-equipped for easy loading with a retractable hub and a spring-loaded cassette-locator bai. Just slide the cas-I sette in, pull the film tongue to an orange mark near the take-up spool and close the back. DX contacts automatically set the film speed over a range of ISO 25-3200. There are no manual ISO settings, and non-DX films are automatically rated at ISO 25.

The film-loading process is every bit as simple as it sounds, but if you screw it up by pulling the film tongue out too far (or not far enough), the motor whirrs briefly, then stops, and a beeper chirps to warn that the film hasn't loaded properly. Even if you miss those hints, the shutter won’t fire and the frame counter remains at “E" for empty.

Assuming that you've loaded the camera correctly, something very unusual happens when you close the back. The motor immediately winds all the film onto the take-up reel. When it’s done winding, the top-deck counter shows the number of unexposed frames on the roll, up to 36. Now you can take pictures, and the number on the counter will move down a notch after each frame. At the end of the roll, the motor winds in the film leader, and the counter returns to “E".

The 750 is the first SLR to use this film "prewinding" system, which was pioneered on Fuji point-and-shoot cameras The idea is that your exposed frames are safely hidden in the film cassette, so if you inadvertently open the camera back, only blank frames will be fogged. Also, 35mm novices sometimes forget to rewind Defore opening up the camera back at the end of a roll; with the 750, no damage is done.

Film prewinding fulfills the Biblical prophecy that "the last shall be first and the first last." In secular terms, this means that when you use a 36-expo-sure roll, frame 36 is exposed first, then frame 35, and so on until you reach frame 1. So keep prewinding in mind when you examine negatives or slides shot with the 750; otherwise you may be surprised to find that Christmas pictures come before Thanksgiving shots on the same roll.

The 750 seems to lack a midroll rewind control, but we discovered a method that's not mentioned in the instruction manual. First you press in the bayonet-release button on the front of the body and remove the lens. Next, push the control wheel to its spring-loaded battery-check position, and hold it I there as you press the shutter release. The beeper now chirps for a moment, then the motor starts to wind the film back into the cassette. When it's done, the beeper sounds again to remind you to remove the cassette. Reusing a partly exposed roll isn't easy, because the 750 always winds the film tongue completely into the cassette If you manage to fish out the tongue, again keep in mind that the exposed frames are at the end of the roll.

A light touch on the shutter release button activates the AF and AE systems. In the vast majority of shooting situations, the BASIS AF sensor quickly homes in on the subject in the central viewfinder brackets. When focus is achieved, a circular LED glows at the bottom of the finder, below the bright, contrasty image area. Only with considerable effort were we able to find subjects with extraordinarily low contrast, or odd horizontal patterns that baffled the AF system. In such cases, the LED circle blinks rapidly and the shutter won't fire. If you want to shoot anyway, move the focus-selector switch on the lens to its "M" position and focus manually.

Virtually all other aspects of the 750's operation are controlled by a large knurled wheel on the top deck. The wheel has five positions, each clearly labeled with a word or symbol. We have already mentioned the spring-loaded battery-check position, which is logically designated with a line drawing of a battery. As you hold the wheel in this position, the beeper chirps quickly to indicate adequate power, slowly to warn of a weak battery or not at all if the battery is exhausted.

The next position on the wheel is boldly marked PROGRAM, with a groove to indicate that it's the normal operating mode. Naturally, the AE program sets apertures and shutter speeds automatically, according to the ambient light level and film speed in use. More surprising in a camera of this class is the sophistication of the program. Electrical contacts on the lens mount relay the focal length of the lens in use to the metering system. Whenever possible the program chooses a shutter speed high enough for hand-held shooting with that focal length, according to the familiar reciprocal formula. So a 28mm lens will be set to at least ’/30 sec ond, a 50mm lens to a minimum of Veo, etc.

There is no way to shift the program manually, or to determine which f/stop or shutter speed is being set. But a "P"-shaped LED in the viewfinder glows when the shutter speed is high enough for hand-holding, or blinks twice per second as a low-light warning. In the unlikely event that the ambient light level is out of the camera's EV 0-20 range, the "P" blinks rapidly.

All ambient-light exposures are determined by an SPD that divides the image area into a six-section ‘‘evaluative” pattern. Each section is evaluated for brightness and contrast according to an integral computer program, which automatically compensates for backlighting or other potential exposure problems. You can’t make manual exposure settings, however.

The meter is switched on when you press lightly on the shutter button. A reading is quickly made, and held until you release the button, or press it all the way in to take the picture. Alternately, metering and exposure can be achieved with one smooth stroke on the shutter button. If you hold the button down, the camera will continue to fire, pausing only to refocus if necessary.

The only other exposure mode is depth-of-field AE, a most unusual holdover from the EOS 650. This mode employs the AF and AE systems to ensure that two subjects at different distances will both be rendered sharply. After you turn the control wheel to the DEP position, the system works like this: You point the camera so that the viewfinder AF brackets face the first subject, then press the shutter button. The beeper will chirp and the AF circle will blink slowly to let you know that that distance has been memorized. Now do the same thing with the second subject; you will again hear a chirp and the AF circle will blink faster. Finally, compose the picture as you want and press the shutter button. In the instant before exposure, the focus is set to an in-between point and the lens is stopped down as much as possible to bring both of your subjects into focus.

You can’t tell exactly what settings are being selected in the depth-AE mode, but the viewfinder LEDs give some valuable clues. If the AF circle glows steadily just before exposure, it means that both subjects will be rendered sharply. A blinking circle lets you know that the two subjects are too far apart, even with the lens set to its minimum aperture for greatest depth-of-field. Small apertures generally call for the use of slow shutter speeds, so it’s also wise to keep an eye on the camera-shake-warning LED. If it blinks, you've got to use a tripod or other firm support, because flash can't be used with depth AE.

A less-obvious use of depth-AE is to create minimal depth-of-field, in order to separate a subject from the background. To do this, you just make both distance readings on the same subject. The exposure system then sets as wide an aperture as possible, depending upon the ambient light level and film speed in use. This minimum-depth method also tends to choose high shutter speeds, but it's not quick enough to use with fast-moving subjects. Again, there’s no way to know exactly what aperture is being set, but at least steady handholding should not be a problem.

To set the self timer, you turn the 750's control wheel to a clock symbol. Press the shutter button to start the ten-second electronic timing cycle, which is audibly signaled by eight seconds of medium-tempo beeping followed by a fast two-second finale. Finally, the control wheel also has an "L" position, which locks the shutter and prevents battery drain.

As we stated earlier, only the 750 has a built-in flash. As long as the camera's top-deck slider switch is in the auto-flash position, this flash unit is fully integrated with the AE program. In bright light, the flash remains out of sight. But if the evaluative metering system detects low light or heavy backlighting, the flash unit automatically turns on and pops up.

While the flash is cycling—usually about two seconds— the “P" in the viewfinder blinks The "P" glows when the flash is ready, and you can take the picture. Just before exposure, the evaluative metering system chooses an f/stop and shutter speed (between Vm and '/125 second) according to the ambient light. During exposure, an SPD at tiie bottom of the mirror box makes a centerweighted reading of the film surface to control flash output. And immediately after exposure, the flash retracts to its normal, hidden position.

With the 750's flash popped up, you will also notice a small lens that emits a near-infrared focus-assist beam. This allows auto-focusing in low light, or even total darkness, at distances up to four meters (13.1 feet).

The beam is meant to be used with the flash, but we found a rather roundabout way to employ it for available-light exposures as well. In low light, with the camera set for autoflash, you lightly press the shutter release. The flash pops up, and while it's cycling the focus-assist beam enables the AF system to lock onto the subject. Now you switch the lens to manual focusing (without changing the distance setting), then move the flash-mode switch to off. Finally, push the shutter button all the way in to make the exposure. Admittedly, this is not the most convenient shooting method in the world, but it does let you make sharply focused pictures in mighty dim surroundings.

The integrated flash system is truly the ultimate in compactness and convenience: totally automated with film-planereading exposure accuracy; adding virtually no size or weight to the camera; and drawing power from the camera battery. Flash coverage is wide enough for a 35mm lens, and of course you can turn it off for available-light shooting. But there's no way to turn the flash on if the meter doesn't think it is needed Manual flash switching is useful in some marginal lighting conditions, so we missed it on the 750. If you want a more powerful flash unit, the 750 also has a hot shoe that accepts Canon EZ-series dedicated flash units, or the new Speedlite 160E.

So why would anyone prefer the EOS 850, which lacks the convenience of built-in flash? One reason is that the 850 is slightly lower in price. Also, by mounting the compact Speed-lite 160E in the 850's dedicated hot shoe, you completely duplicate the fully integrated operation and focus-assist beam of the 750's flash, with several advantages.

The 160E offers higher light output (guide number 52 versus 39 for the 750 flash) and greater distance from flash tube to lens, to lessen the redeye effect. It draws power from a separate 2CR5 lithium battery, so the battery in the camera will last longer And if the camera battery does fail, you can replace it with the identical flash battery and keep on shooting. The focus-assist beam on the 160E is bright enough for AF operation with subjects up to five meters (16 4 feet) away in total darkness. Like the 750. the 850 also accepts the more powerful EZ-se-ries dedicated flash units.

Five new lenses have recently been added to the Canon EF series. Two telephotos, a 200mm f/1.8 and a 600mm f/4, are sophisticated, fast members of the pricey "L" series. At the other end of the focal-length spectrum is a 24mm f/2.8 wide-angle. In between, and more relevant to the typical EOS 750/850 user, are a pair of inexpensive zooms. The compact 35-70mm f/3.5-4 and 100-200mm f/4.5 both have “A" designations, which means they are intended for AF operation only, and for that reason lack the usual manual-focus switch and external focusing ring, cutting the price on these optics.
In fact, the EOS 750 and 850 could also be characterized as fine ways to achieve top-notch photographic results without spending a ton of money. The 750, in particular, offers every nuance of automated convenience that point-and-shooters crave, along with the superior viewing, AF, and AE operation of a modern SLR. And with the Speedlite 160E in place, the 850 operates just as easily, with a touch more flash power. We can’t tell you how to decide between the EOS 750 and 850, but either one is a sure winner for the SLR beginner.
