CONTAX RTS II, LOOKS THE SAME, BUT .. .

MANUFACTURERS SPECIFICATIONS: Contax RTS II Quartz 35mm single-lens-reflex camera. Body No. 146062. LENS: 50mm f/1.4 Zeiss Planar in Contax/Yashi-ca bayonet mount, No. 6425055, with stops to f/16, focusing to 1 ft. 6 in. (0.45 m), accepts 59mm screw-in accessories. SHUTTER: Quartz-timed, electronically operated, horizontal-travel titanium focal-plane with speeds from 16 to 1/2000 sec. in auto mode, 4 to 1/2000 sec. in manual mode, plus В, X sync., 1/50 sec. mechanical and В without battery, electronic selftimer. VIEWING: Non-interchangeable eye-level prism with interchangeable focusing screen having central microprism, fine focusing collar. METERING: Single silver-oxide battery-powered silicon-photodiode circuit with cell above viewfinder eyepiece measures center-weighted area of entire focusing screen at full aperture and second SPD inside mirror box which measures exposure off the film with dedicated flash units. Aperture-priority auto exposure with auto-compensation dial and compensation warning in viewfinder, exposure memory holds EV. OTHER FEATURES: Removable back with memo holder, depth-of-field preview, mirror lock-up, hot sync shoe with provision for electronic remote and cable release, special flash unit coupling, auto winder, motor drive and data back. MANUFACTURER: Yashica Co. Ltd., Okaya, Japan. IMPORTER: Yashica Inc., Paramus, NJ 07652. Price: $1016 with 50mm f/1.4 Zeiss Planar. Body only, $750.00.

It's been over seven years since we tested the Contax RTS, but it has taken that long for many of the other manufacturers to catch up with some of the Contax innovations. Contax was among the first to put LEDs in finder, and to make full use of the camera's electronic circuitry with such now common features as electromagnetic shutter and remote release on a 35mm SLR, and complete viewfinder information including autocompensation warning. Over those six long years we have seen the introduction of several cameras to the Contax line, incorporating such innovations as electronic quartz timing, and off-the-film flash metering, as Yashica, like all camera manufacturers struggled to keep the Contax “state-of-the-art" in electronics. These were exciting, useful additions to Contax photography, but unfortunately kept to the newer compact models 139 and 137 MD, never to be added to the more rugged top-of-the-line Contax RTS—until now.

Borrowing features and technology from all previous models, while adding major new ones, the Contax engineers have unveiled a professional-level SLR claimed to be extraordinarily rugged and durable, but packed with electronics as well as some surprising mechanical backups, which we’ll discuss as we put the camera through the paces.

At first glance, the RTS II is hard to distinguish from its predecessor. In appearance, the major differences are in the styling of the electronic self-timer, (as opposed to the mechanical lever o.i the RTS), and the location of the PC contact, which has been raised to the top of the body of the Contax RTS II. Viewing the camera from the top reveals even more subtle differences: the addition of flash dedication, a shutter-speed dial lock, an on/off switch added below the ASA setting dial, two slight protrusions from the camera's back indicative of an eyepiece blind lever, and the absence of the battery check display.

The bottom of the camera is conventional with rewind button and battery cover, plus provision for motor drives. The cover is a big improvement over all similar battery covers. No longer need you fumble through your pockets for an appropriate coin to open the battery compartment. Instead a hinged key sits flush within the recessed cover. Even clumsy fingers should have little difficulty in lifting up this key then turning it to unscrew the cover. In the compartment goes either a 6.2.-volt silver-oxide^Eveready 544 or equivalent) or a 6-volt alkaline-manganese battery (4LR44). As with most electronic cameras, the camera circuitry must be turned on before film can be loaded. To turn the camera on, flip the lever located just below, and to the front of the ASA setting dial to the left. A red dot beneath the lever indicates that the camera is operational. To check the batteries, press the meter-check button on the front, with your right index finger. The viewfinder LEDs light if the battery is O.K. . If the LEDs light, but flash rapidly, then the batteries are weak, and should be replaced as soon as possible. Leaving the camera on for extended periods shouldn't drain the battery, as the finder LEDs will go off 16 secs, after releasing the meter-check button. The battery will drain slowly, (rapidly if the exposure lock is engaged, or meter-check button remains inadvertently pressed), so we suggest that the camera be turned off whenever it won’t be used for more than an hour.

Pull up on the rewind knob to open the camera back. The film is loaded in the conventional manner. With the camera set to “auto" the shutter will fire at 1/60 sec. to prevent inadvertent delays in getting the camera operational as you advance the film to frame 1. As with the original RTS, you can’t watch the rewind crank turn when advancing film, to check film advance. Instead, a white bar turns counterclockwise in the center of the rewind crank if all is well. The rapid wind lever remains virtually unchanged from the RTS, using a single 140° or multiple stroke. Any ASA from 12 to 3200 can be set by lifting the ASA setting collar to the right of the prism and turning it until the white line aligns with the required ASA. (For those planning to use Kodacolor 1000, the first dot after 800 is ASA 1000). Make sure that the auto-compensation setting below this collar is at X1. There is no locking device, only detents, to keep the collar from shifting accidentally. However, if the auto-compensation isn’t at “X1”, a warning will appear in the viewfinder.

Set the shutter-speed dial around the rewind knob to “A" and the RTS II is ready for action. If the dial doesn't turn, it’s because a pushbutton lock has been added on the back of the camera, just to the lower right of the dial. The lock only works on two settings, A, for aperture-preferred automatic exposure, and X, for manually-set sync speed. This is a welcome feature as we often found the earlier Contax accidentally shifted settings.

The viewfinder is one of the brightest on any SLR with the whole picture area almost entirely visible, even by eyeglass wearers. An accessory rubber eyecup is furnished and correction eyepieces are available. As with most SLRs, we found the rubber eyecup difficult to use with glasses. The center of the standard focusing screen has a microprism to assure focus. To see the finder information, touch the exposure check button on the front, right of the camera. You needn't hold the button, as the display will remain on for 16 secs, after you let go. Pressing the shutter release slightly will also turn on the finder information, but only when the shutter is not wound, (if wound, and you try this the shutter will release!)

To the right of the screen you'll see bright red LED-lit shutter-speed numerals. At the bottom, you see segmented LEDs (the type you’ll find on many calculators and in the Canon A-1) indicating the aperture set to the nearest V2 stop. If two speeds are lit, then the actual shutter speed will be about half-way between. Changing the shutter-speed selection to manual does not remove this information from the display, instead, the manually selected shutter speed will flash, while the camera-selected shutter speed remains constant. If the two speeds coincide, only one number will flash in the finder. Once you get used to this system you'll find the RTS II easy to use manually. (If there is no film in the camera, or the film is not wound to the first frame, the display reads as if you had manually selected the 1/60 sec. shutter speed).

On “A" you can hold any exposure setting by pushing upward on the memory hold lever adjacent to the exposure check button. A white line on the lever indicates its position clearly. The exposure selected remains constant no matter how many exposures are made. To return to regular operation, push the lever down. The lever can be operated, even while you're looking through the finder. Within, the shutter speeds flash to warn you that the memory hold is in use.

The memory hold does have a unique feature: if the memory hold is on and the aperture is changed, the corresponding shutter speed will automatically shift to maintain the same exposure (EV) level. The finder display shifts appropriately, showing the different f/ stop and shutter-speed combinations.

Besides using the memory hold, the autoexposure setting can also be altered by using the +- 2 stop auto-compensation dial concentric with the ASA dial. It can be set in V2 stop increments. Within the finder, + or -indicator LEDs light to the right of the aperture LEDs, a useful feature. It would have been better if the amount of compensation also appeared, but such information isn't available on any cameras, yet. Auto compensation will work up to ±2 stops at both ASA 3200 and ASA 12.

The camera’s controls fail almost automatically under your fingertips. Clearly ergonomic features are still important to the design team and continuing the basic Porsche design concepts seen in the original RTS. Gently press the electromagnetic shutter to release the quartz-timed, rubberized titanium focal-plane shutter. The shutter has curtains of reduced thickness, only 0.015 mm, about half as thick as standard shutter curtains.

The Contax RTS II makes extensive use of ball bearings to reduce friction and assure mechanical reliability. Ball bearings are used in six points of the shutter mechanism. If the battery fails or is absent, the shutter can still be fired manually from a rather unlikely place, the depth-of-field preview plunger at the bottom of the lens mount. Normally a white line on a lever adjacent to this plunger points upwards. Flip this lever outwards, 90° from the body. Now the depth-of-field preview becomes a non-electric release to provide a completely mechanical 1/50 sec. shutter speed.

For exposures longer than 16 sec. on auto, or 4 secs, on manual, turn the shutter-speed dial to B. The shutter will remain open for as long as you maintain pressure on the shutter release. You can also use a standard or electronic cable release in the socket at the back of the camera, just below the wind lever. However, prolonged exposures made in this manner can drain the battery. To obviate this problem for making such pictures as an allnight exposure of the stars, there’s a second cable release socket on the bottom of the lens mount. This allows you to operate the shutter mechanically on B, with no battery drain at all.

Above this socket you’ll find a mirror lockup lever, a feature sadly missing on many other "top-of-the-line” models. It’s extremely useful in avoiding camera vibration when doing such work as photomicrography.

As with the earlier RTS, focusing screens are changeable from the mirror box with a special tool. Although RTS II screens are not interchangeable with those for the RTS, to accommodate the RTS M’s brighter, larger focusing screen, most screen types available for the original have been duplicated for the model II.

Many users consider off-the-film (OTF) flash metering as almost a necessity in a top-of-the line SLR. Borrowing the system originally introduced in the Contax 139, and later used in the 137MD, the RTS II designers installed an SPD cell in the bottom of the mirror box facing the film to monitor and control flash exposure right from the film surface. Coupled with the TLA20, TLA30, or the larger grip-type RTF540 (with optional "TLA” adapter), the RTS II will provide viewfinder flash ready, and flash confirmation signals. With the flash recycled and ready to fire, the shutter speed is automatically set to 1/60 sec. Independent “dedicated” units offering TTL flash metering for the 137 and 139 should work as well on the RTS II.

In cold weather when batteries become less efficient, or cease operating altogether, or a backup power supply is needed, the External Power Pack P-3 can replace the camera's battery. The P-3 incorporates four 1.5v AA cells, (Nicads can’t be used), and connects to the camera via a silicon-coated cord. The batteries fit into a pouch which you can slip into your pocket. You can quickly disconnect the P-3 when required.

The RTS was one of the earliest cameras to feature a data back as an off-the-shelf accessory, but that back had to be coupled to the camera via the PC socket. The RTS II triggers the data back directly by lighting a small LED in the bottom of the film chamber. The Databack Quartz D-4 can imprint the date, time, a predetermined index, or can be set to imprint a count from 000 to 399 in the lower right corner of the frame. For Databack users, Contax has a very clever special focusing screen which shows the data imprinting location in the finder.

While the RTS motor drive and autowinder will work with the RTS II, on continuous setting only, the Real Time winder W-3 ($178), and Professional Motor Drive unit W-6 ($705 with power pack) are designed specifically for the RTS II, but should work equally well with the RTS. Both the W-3 and W-6 offer single frame as well as continuous firing capability. We found the winder capable of frame rates up to 2.8 frames/sec., the motor drive up to 4.8 fps. Six AA cells power the winder which is usable at all shutter speeds in either manual or auto-exposure modes.

The motor drive W-6 incorporates an inter-valometer which can be set at selected speeds from 3 fps to 1 frame every 60 seconds (see photo below right). You can set a countdown frame counter, so that the motor will stop after any number of exposures. The battery pack powering the motor drive holds 12 AA cells. It attaches below the motor drive, sporting a power level meter instead of the more common battery check.

Weighing the same as the Canon F-1, at 2 lbs. 5% oz. (each with lens), the RTS II is a tad heavier than most current SLRs, but many of us felt that its solid feel is a valuable asset. It took us a few minutes to adjust to the unconventional placing of the shutter-speed dial. As with the RTS, once we accepted this control location, we judged changing speeds as easy as on any SLR to date. At first we were curious about the lack of a split-image focusing aid on the standard focusing screen, but we found the bright central microprism focusing fast and accurate.

Aside from the aforementioned possibility of excessive battery consumption under certain conditions, it is difficult to seriously find fault with the RTS II. Most of our comments run in the "what could have been" category. After using the Contax 137 MD and getting hooked on the in-finder frame counter, we would have been delighted if Contax had borrowed this (so far) exclusive feature and incorporated it in the RTS II. After trying autoexposure compensation in the field, we decided that the location of the auto-compensation dial would enable quick bracketing without removing your eye from the finder if there was a simple way of switching the functions of the meter check and shutter release buttons.

Like all Contaxes, the RTS II uses Zeiss lenses, and will accept any other lens in the Contax/Yashica bayonet mount. As we did with the RTS, we tested our sample with its high-speed normal lens, a 50mm f/1.4 Zeiss Planar T*.

Field test slides: We found the flare to be very well controlled even when shooting directly towards the sun. We found our slides crisp and snappy, although there appeared to be a slight softness at the wider apertures. This performance is considered average for a 50mm f/1.4 lens.

Optical bench analysis (for optical experts only): On axis we observed a slight overcorrected spherical aberration and a slight zonal aberration in a very compact image. Both aberrations were gone by f/2.8. Off-axis we observed slight skew-ray flare, very slight astigmatism, and a very, very slight coma pattern, all of which were gone by f/5.6. (February 1983)
