Since Contax cameras have been produced in Japan they have proved one of the most reliable and high quality ranges on the market-the Yashica expertise in electronics has been exploited to the full, producing results that only a few years ago would have been considered science fiction.

For several years the RTS was the supreme model in the Contax range. But in 1979 the 139 emerged, a smaller and lighter camera with Quartz timing and twin metering cells for normal and off-film flash readings, while retaining the elegance of the Porsche design.

The combined mode and shutter speed selector dial is unusually positioned on the left hand end of the top plate. In the manual mode these run between 1 and 1/10Q0sec but the longest extends to four seconds when used as an auto.

The modes which can be chosen are B for brief time exposure, Auto for automatic aperture priority operation ancfX which has the flash synch speed at 1/100 sec. To use the camera as a manual a shutter speed must be selected.

The hot-shoe has two additional contacts for the extensive and excellent Contax dedicated flash system.

Situated where the shutter speed dial would be on a conventional camera is the shutter release/film speed selector/auto exposure override control. The hub of the dial is the shutter release which is electromagnetic in operation and very smooth to operate. Within this dial is the film speed setting which runs from 12 to 3200ASA in third of a stop steps. The auto exposure compensation gives + and - two stops, this is marked as 1A, 1/2, X1, for normal exposure, X2 and X4. When the compensation lock is in use the viewfinder aperture display turns orange from its normal white.

Beside this dial and to the front of the top plate is the frame counter. This is additive and self zeroing when the camera back is opened. The wind-on lever is one of the most pleasant feeling of any I have used.

The front of the body is not the control desert of so many of today’s cameras. The Porsche design team have placed everything in just the position that the photographers fingers will fall and have made full use of this space.

To the top right of the lens mounting is the LED viewfinder display turn-on button. When this is pressed the display lights up for 10 seconds, which can be repeated, or until the shutter is fired. This button is
located exactly where the middle finger of the right hand falls and can easily be used with the index finger on the shutter release.

The button means that it is impossible for the camera to be stowed away in the bag with the LEDs all lit up and wasting valuable battery power.

Surrounding this is the exposure memory lock, used, like the compensation lock, to overcome awkward lighting. A meter reading can be taken close to a subject, or before framing and then ‘locked’ into the metering system so any areas of extreme light or shade are ignored.

Below this switch is the self timer, this runs for 10 seconds and is indicated by a flashing LED.

Almost at the bottom of the lens housing is the depth of field preview button, this stops the lens down to its selected working aperture to check exactly how much is going to be sharp.

At the top of the body is the P/C socket for synching non dedicated flash units.

On the top back right of the camera is another socket which houses the remote release connector. This really comes into its own when the camera is used together with its power winder. Unlike a normal cable release this is operated by a lead and electronic switch - which lends itself to many exotic forms of remote firing.

The viewfinder carries full exposure information. Apertures are shown at the top of the frame and 16 LEDs are positioned beside the shutter speed to the right with under and over exposure warnings.

Full information is also provided on flash exposure when the camera is used together with the versatile Contax flash system which is one of the easiest to use and efficient available.

The shutter is timed by Quartz - the Contax was the first camera to offer this facility. Quartz timing of shutter speeds is far more accurate than previous systems but the mechanical linkages still have to operate, thus reducing the accuracy so it is not significantly better than the old fashioned system.

This is certainly a classic camera to use. The Planar T* f/1.7 lens is as good as anything available and considerably better than most. One word of warning, several of the controls are situated where you would not expect them to be, but try this camera for a roll or two and nothing will ever feel the same again.
