Contax 645

When Contax decides to do something, as its past introductions so aptly illustrate, Contax doesn’t mess around. The Contax 645, a totally modular, autofocus, medium-format camera system, certainly illustrates this. It is the only camera on the planet that can claim to use au to focus Carl Zeiss lenses. If you read my description of the Contax AX in the 35mm section, you may recall my musings that the reason why Contax had to build a body that autofocuses rather than lenses that do, was most likely pure recalcitrance on Zeiss’s part. The fact that Zeiss decided to design AF lenses for the Contax 645 actually tends to reinforce my suspicions. That is, as long as Zeiss had to design a new set of optics, there was no reason why it should not design them to autofocus as well. Anyway, let’s take a look at this impressive system.

As touched upon above, the Contax 645 is a system camera. Finders, backs, focusing screens, and lenses can be interchanged. The motor drive is built in to the camera body, as is the exposure meter and autofocus system. The 645 uses a focal plane shutter, which, while not allowing for flash sync at all speeds, permits lens designs with fast maximum apertures and keeps the price of lenses down to a more reasonable level than it otherwise would be.

The 645’s autofocus system uses a TTL phase difference detection design,
using the EOS principle where each lens has its own on-board focusing motor. Focusing modes include single shot and continuous predictive AF, with AF lock. The 645’s lens mount is all new. It is very large, which means that vignetting with large lenses should not be a problem. It also uses electrical contacts to transmit information between the body and the lens; there are no mechanical couplings at all. Power for the lens’ onboard focusing and diaphragm motors is supplied by the camera body.

Exposure modes include aperture-and shutter-priority AE, metered manual, and TTF pre-flash metering, as well as auto flash TTF either with flashes mounted to the dedicated hot shoe or with SCA-compatible units via an SCA plug located on the side of the camera body. The TTF pre-flash mode amounts to a built-in flash meter, and works with any flash. It is identical to that found on the Contax RTS III. In terms of exposure metering, either centerweighted or spot metering modes can be employed. A total of ±2 EV of exposure compensation is available in 1/3-step increments.

The metal-bladed vertically traversing focal plane shutter provides shutter speeds ranging from 32 seconds to 1/4000 second (8 seconds to 1/4000 second in manual), plus B and T, with flash sync in auto at 1/125 second and 1/90 second in manual. The integral film winder features single and continous
advance at speeds up to 2.5 frames per second, plus mid-roll wind-ahead.

Other features include support for Fuji’s film barcode system, which works similar to DX coding on 35mm cassettes, depth-of-field preview, multiple exposure capability, mirror lock-up, a cable release socket, a standard PC connector, and a self-timer which can be set to either 2 or 10 seconds.
