Let’s say you’re the CEO of a com-ny that you feel — no, that you know ikes the best products on the market, it let’s say that the market has changed tndamentally and is now heading in a 'irection that you feel you cannot take our company, since it would mean that ou would be forced to compromise the uality of your products in the short erm. But you know you have to do umething because if you don’t, the mar-.et will leave you and your company tehind, and sooner rather than later, vour company, maker of the finest predicts on the market, will be naught but a ading, albeit beloved, memory. The ong term solution, which might be lore appealing would require huge &D investments and time you do not ave so that you could maintain the high aad that you had carved out for your-lf. But then you ask yourself, “If it ain’t oke, why fix it?”

Surely something not too dissimilar •om this was going through the frus-uated heads of the movers and shakers at Contax. The official spin goes that Contax realized early on it would be impossible to design AF versions of the Zeiss lenses used on its cameras, but I don’t buy this story for a couple of reasons: one, nothing is impossible if you put your mind to it. Canon and Nikon have demonstrated that. Their current generation autofocus optics are superior n optical performance to their earlier nanual focus ones. But look how long it ook them to do it. Two, please recall tat Contax is not Zeiss. Contax is censed to produce Zeiss lenses, and is •ontractually obligated to abide by Zeiss’s stringent design and quality control requirements. If Zeiss says, “No, it’s impossible,” regardless of what the reason might be - and in Zeiss’ case, I believe it to be pure ego-driven recalcitrance - then Contax must say, “No, it’s impossible” too.
So what’s a company to do? Well, I suppose it helps to keep in mind that, as the old saw goes, there’s nothing really new under the sun. Fortunately for Contax, this tired old saying had some wisdom to it.

Those of you who are at least moderately experienced camera collectors will perhaps recall the original Mamiya 6, which was produced during the late 1940s and early 1950s. The novel, but still probably not new, thing about this otherwise traditional folding-bed, bel-lows-type square medium format camera is that it employs a knurled ring located on the camera body to move the film plane into focus. Bingo.

Fast forward fifty years, and, lo and behold, we see history repeating itself with the Contax AX. And, not only is the AX a brilliant feat of design and engineering, but the introduction of this camera surely must have caused a huge sigh of relief to go up among Contax users everywhere. Why? Well, because Zeiss lenses aren’t exactly cheap, are they? Now, for the price of one or two Zeiss lenses, the Contax user can buy a camera body that will convert his or her entire lens inventory to autofocus. In a world, brilliant.

The AX’s Automatic Back Focusing System amounts to a camera body within a body. The internal body slides fore and aft on a ceramic collar and rail arrangement that holds an exceedingly tight tolerance of two microns (0.0002 mm). Such a close fit insures perfect alignment of the film plane at the point of focus. Undoubtedly, Contax was the direct beneficiary of its parent company Kyocera’s experience in ceramics manufacture and design for die development of this crucial AX subcomponent. One nice side benefit to the AX’s focusing method is that any lens wall focus closer than normal. Because of its design, the Automatic Back Focusing System provides an additional 10mm of extension,
so now every lens will, in effect, have a macro setting.

Rather than target this camera toward the advanced amateur, Contax had the professional user in mind. The AX is not small, and not particularly light. At 38.1 ounces (1,080 grams), it is only a few ounces lighter than the Nikon F5, but boasts a die cast aluminum alloy chassis and titanium top cover.

Autofocusing is done via Contax’s phase difference detection system. Focusing modes include Single Autofocus (SAF), Continous Autofocus (CAF), M (manual focus), and Macro. While the AX’s AF performance is not as fast as its competitors, its accuracy is second to none.

Exposure modes include program AE, shutter- and aperture-priority AE, metered manual, and TTL auto flash. Either centerweighted averaging or spot metering is available. Other exposure options include exposure compensation, autobracketing, multiple exposure capability, and an AE lock.

Shutter speeds range from 32 seconds to 1/6000 second, plus B, with flash sync occuring at 1/200 second. The integral film winder has the standard array of features and will advance film at a maximum rate of 5 frames per second. Other features include a selection of eight custom functions, interchangeable viewing screens, a PC terminal, depth-of-field preview, DX film coding with override, and built-in diopter correction. Optional is the Multifunction Data Back D-8, which will print data between frames or store it in the camera’s onboard memory, then download it onto the first and second frames upon completion of the roll. The DB-8 can also be configured to operate as an inter-valometer.
