Contax ST

The Contax ST represents a superb balance of form and function. Its form can only be described as elegant. Its function, however, is very traditional by today’s auto everything standards. Nevertheless, the elements of the ST combine to provide the serious photographer with a perfect extension of his view. Designed to accompany the professional or ardent amateur into most any environment - be it friendly or hostile -the ST is as rugged as it is sleek. The camera is housed entirely in metal: the body is composed of copper-silumin alloy, while the top and bottom cover are brass. Contax engineers opted for brass covers over higher-tech substances because of brass’s inherent shockabsorbing properties. And, given the tact that the ST is designed to accept the Carl Zeiss T* lenses, one has the capability to
produce images of unrivaled quality.

The ST is billed as having seven exposure modes. These are aperture-priority AE, shutter-priority AE, programmed auto, manual, TTL auto flash, manual TTL auto flash and manual flash. Exposure compensation is available (±2EV in third-stop increments) as is AE lock. An auto-bracketing mode can be selected as well, which will provide a 3 frame continuous exposure control by switch-over from ±0.5EV to ±1.0EV. Available metering patterns are centerweighted averaging and spot. The spot pattern is indicated by the 5mm diameter microprism ring in the viewfinder. Another nice feature that makes viewing and composition all the more easier is an oversized high-eyepoint pentaprism.

Shutter speeds range from 16 seconds to 1/6000 second (1 second to 1/4000 second in manual and shutter-priority AE), plus B with an elapsed time indicator. X sync occurs at 1/200. Second curtain flash sync is available with Contax flashes (such as the TLA 280) that support the feature.

Other features include auto film loading and rewind with the built-in winder, single or continuous film advance with speeds up to 3 fps, mid-roll film rewind, user-interchangeable focusing screens, a cable release socket and a PC connector (two features overlooked all too often by other manufacturers), a self-timer, dioptric adjustment from -3 to +1 diopters and DX film coding with override.