The name Contax has been one of the most respected for whole generations of photographers. Since the mid 1970s manufacture has been carried out in Japan and the design has been a three handed affair with Porche taking care of the body lines and Yashica the electronics.

This has resulted in the Contax 137. As we would expect from this company they have taken the basic concept and added a whole range of extras that make the camera one of the most appealing available.

For a start there is no wind-on lever, a built-in motor handles all the mechanical functions. Yet this has not resulted in a heavy, bulky body; the micro motor is tucked away in the right hand side of the body and does not upset the balance and feel.

The exposure system relies on SPD cells and there is visible indication of both shutter speed and aperture in the viewfinder. A memory lock provides extra control and plus or minus two stops override for awkward lighting. Both these are shown in the viewfinder so there is no possibility of forgetting that one, or both, are in use.

Additional information shown in the finder is an under or over exposure warning, flash ready light and flash exposure information when used with the excellent dedicated flash system and the film frame number.

This has more information shown than any other camera available and is more of a control centre than a simple aid to composition and focusing.

Winding-on can be by single frame or continuous at a maximum rate of two frames per second. This is controlled by a simple lever on the top right of the body.
Even with the winder driving at its maximum rate there is still little vibration and the camera seems rocksteady at all times.

Power is provided by four ‘AA’ penlight cells held in a magazine in the base of the body. Spare clips are available for guick re-loading. A large green battery condition light glows on the top plate. The camera will not operate without power.

The standard lens is the Carl Zeiss Planar 50mm f/1.7 T*. The results from this lens are of a good enough standard to judge all others by and the range of lenses available to form a system are both comprehensible and excellent.

In the back of the body is a film advance indicator which confirms that film is being driven through the camera and acts as a useful reassurance. There is also a built-in electronic self timer which gives a delay of 10 seconds with a flashing lamp indicating operation.

Remote release is carried out by means of a Contax electronic cable rather than the conventional cable release socket and the electro-magnetic shutter is extremely smooth.

This camera is a joy to operate. Everything falls easily to hand and has that ‘just right’ feel about it. Using this camera is so pleasant that you could find yourself shooting far more film than you are accustomed to. Without any doubt this camera is the best auto only model available and with a memory lock and override it could also be classed as having a manual option.
