Contax RTS III

The RTS III is the new leader in the dubious “Most Expensive Japanese 35mm SLR” category. Being that it’s more expensive than the Nikon F4 and the Canon EOS-In by several hundred dollars, you’d probably expect it to be crammed with features, offering the latest state-of-the-are technology and, of course, exhibiting the very best of craftsmanship The response to such expectations is an unqualified “Sort of.” For example, your 2,000 plus semolians doesn’t buy you autofocus, nor do you get even a single program mode, and you can forget about the latest smart technology in multi-segmented metering patterns. But what you do get is impressive.

The RTS III has a unique vacuum mechanism coupled with a ceramic pressure plate that sucks the film flat at the film plane, insuring maximum sharpness. Another unique feature is its TTL pre-flash spot metering system, which allows the user to check exposure with any flash, from wink lights to studio strobes, not just dedicated units. The RTS III joins the Nikon F family and the EOS-1 as one of a handful of 35mm SLRs that offer a 100% field of view through the viewfinder (most other 35mm SLRs
have a field of view ranging from 90% to 97%).

Exposure modes include shutter or aperture-priority AE and metered manual using centerweighted or spot metering. Other exposure features include TTL flash metering with dedicated flash units (second-curtain sync with the TLA280 flash), autobracketing, an AE lock and exposure compensation. Shutter speeds range from 32 seconds to 1/8000 (4 seconds to 1/8000 in manual), plus B, with X sync at 1/250.

Other features include a built-in databack that records information between the frames, mirror lock-up, interchangeable focusing screens, diopter correction, an eyepiece shutter, depth-of-field preview, multiple exposure capability, DX film coding with override, a die-cast aluminum body with a magnesium top plate and a titanium bottom plate, and an integral motor drive that provides continuous speeds up to 5 fps.
