When Olympus first showed their OM1 in 1973 they took the whole world of camera design and gave it a thorough shaking. Moving against all the trends they drastically reduced the size and weight of the full specification 35mm SLR camera. Many others have followed suit but it was Olympus that first reduced the size of both camera bodies and lenses to what we know today.

This mechanical camera has all the makings of a fully professional model with an entire system standing behind it. So much so that many of the leading photographers around the world relyonanOMI as their only 35mm camera.

As with the auto-metering OM2 many of the controls are in different places to other cameras. However once the lay-out becomes familiar everything is easily accessible.

The shutter speed dial sits around the lens throat. Speeds available run from 1 to 1/1000sec plus B, those speeds that can be used for electronic flash synching, up to 1 /60, are engraved in green, the rest in red. Dedicated flash is possible with the wide range of Olympus guns and accessories from the fitted, changeable hot-shoe. Other flash units can also be used and synchronised either from the hot-shoe on the pentaprism housing or by the locking P/C terminal on the left side of the lens mounting. This can be switched for either X or FP class bulbs. With dedicated flash there is LED viewfinder confirmation that all is well.

The On/Off switch is placed right between the rewind knob and the prism housing - this is easily forgotten and the camera could be put away in a bag with the metering still activated - resulting in battery drain.

The film speed selector sits to the right of the finder, where you would expect the shutter speed dial to be. This runs from 25 to 1600ASA.

Also on the top plate are the shutter release button, which is threaded for a cable release, the wind-on lever, which can be inched and the frame counter
which is additive and self-zeroing.

The self timer is on the front of the body, is mechanical and can be set between four and 12 seconds. Above this is the re-wind release.

On the right side of the lens mounting is the mirror lock, useful for close-up shots or when using really long lenses. The mirror is locked up and the viewfinder blacked out but there is no chance of internal vibration from it and shake cannot ruin the shot. This is a useful feature that very few manufacturers include these days.

Add to all that the facility for changing the screens and the Olympus viewing system and this is a formidable package. I well remember the first time I picked up an OM1 - I just could not believe the large, clear and bright image through the eyepiece - if you are thinking about buying one of these cameras just pick one up in the store and look through it - you’ll be convinced.

The OM1N will accept the Olympus autowinder and motor drive systems, both are as compact and as light as you would expect from this tiny camera.

The heart of the metering system is two CdS cells, one each side of the viewfinder eyepiece. Indication of exposure is by a swinging needle against a + or -sign.

The standard 50mm f/1.8 lens of all Olympus cameras has a performance that many swear by. The definition is excellent and the high contrast gives a ‘bite’ to results that makes them stand out. Gripping the lens release tabs stops the lens down for a depth of field preview which is another useful feature.

This camera has been around for some time despite the updating that was done with the adding of the N to the title in 1979. So this is either a tried and trusted design-which I believe, or it is well out ofdate-which many others believe. We may see a replacement model before too long. Either way this is a very good camera that despite its small size has all the features and ruggedness to give many years’ excellent service.
