Since 1975 the 0M2 and its slightly modified successor the OM2N has been a favourite among photographers around the world. Olympus forged the way ahead with TTL metering of flash by light reflected from the film’s surface and ambient light readings from the front shutter curtain or from the film.

A photographer moving to Olympus from any other system has to learn a new position for just about every control. The shutter speed dial is around the lens mounting rather in the style of the old Nikkormats. These can be set between 1 and 1/1000sec. Moving out along the lens is the focus ring and finally the aperture scale.

Choosing the operating mode is done on a selector dial between the pentaprism housing and the re-wind knob, with its folding lever. The positions are Manual, which allows any combination of shutter speed and aperture to be selected, Off, which switches the viewfinder information off although the camera will still fire and give correct exposure, and auto which sets everything going to the full. An aperture is set and the camera will then deliver the correct shutter speed. This camera has twin metering systems reading from the pattern on the front shutter curtain and also, if required, the surface of the film itself. So the exposure will change if the light changes during the time that the shutter is open.

In this mode the maximum exposure extends out to a minute - at least that is what Olympus claim but in practice this is a conservative estimate and most models will give considerably longer. All shutter speeds are electronic so in the event of battery failure no shots can be taken. In the auto setting the speeds are stepless.

Check-reset is the last position on this dial. When the lever is moved to this position a red LED lights up on the back of the camera if there is full power. When power is low the light flashes and finally goes out and the camera will not work at all.

The reset part of this position is used if the camera is
operated with dead batteries. If this is done the mirror will lock up. Setting this position gets it down again.

The auto exposure compensation control is on the right side of the prism - where the shutter speed dial sits on many other camera bodies. This allows up to + and - two stops override.

The wind-on lever is plastic tipped and smooth in operation and the shutter release is threaded for a cable release.

The self-timer is on the front of the body and can be set for times between four and 12 seconds.

Flash synchronisation can be carried out from one of two positions. The first, the pentaprism mounted hot-shoe, has two additional contacts for the Olympus dedicated flash system, which is comprehensive and easy to use. The second is a conventional P/C socket on the top right of the lens mounting, this has a switch for X (electronic flash) and for FP class flash bulbs.

As with other cameras from this manufacturer the re-wind is operated by a switch on the top front of the body rather than a button on the base of the body.

Viewfinder information is by swinging needle against the nearest shutter speed in the auto mode. In manual this is restricted to a + and - sign. One of the advantages of the OM range is the clear, bright image on the viewfinder screen - other screens are never the same after looking through an Olympus.

This is still a very small camera to handle although other makes have caught up with Olympus in size and weight. The camera has a full range of accessory lenses and autowinders available plus a full specification motor drive and flash system.

Those who have never used a 35mm SLR will find nothing strange in the controls of this camera, but those moving from other types may have to take a few rolls of film to become accustomed to it. Any user will find the initial effort worthwhile and should derive great pleasure from this camera which first created a stir in the photo world seven years ago.
