This was the third introduction in the highly successful OM series from Olympus. Any camera which followed on from the OM1 and the OM2 had to be something special, since the previous models could be claimed to have changed the face of photography.

This camera is outstanding from the others in its class by the inclusion of a single optional extra - the manual adaptor. This can be plugged into the front of the camera body to give a full range of manual shutter speeds.

The Olympus OM10 also had the distinction of being the first camera to have audible warnings built in. This is by means of a Piezo-electric Ceramic Vibrator (PCV). The battery condition check and the 12 second self timer delay both emit ‘bleeps’.

In true Olympus style the main selector switch is set around the film re-wind knob at the left hand end of the top plate. The positions are: Off, the metering system still operates when this setting is chosen but the viewfinder LEDs do not light up; On, which means that all systems will operate and Check which ensures that the battery has some life in it, confirmed by a ‘bleep’ and a glowing red LED.

The selector switch has one position back from the Off position, this is Self Timer and will deliver a 12 second delay when the shutter release button is pressed.

The film speed and operating mode selector are positioned where you would expect to find the shutter speed dial. Film speeds are marked in ASA only and run from 25 to 1600. This setting is altered to give exposure compensation or override. Beside the zero marking, which is used for normal exposure conditions
are marked + and - 1 and 2. The film speed in use is aligned with one of these for override. This means, of course, that the full compensation each way cannot be used with all film speeds, also it is very easy to forget that it has been set and continue through an entire roll of film under or over exposing.

This dial also selects the mode to be used. There are three position for this: B, Auto, and Manual Adaptor. B is standard for brief exposure and remains open as long as the shutter release is depressed. Auto puts the camera in its normal automatic mode. Manual Adaptor should be used when the optional accessory is fitted. This is plugged into the front of the body and will allow a full range of shutter speeds to be chosen manually. If used without the adaptor in position the Manual Adaptor setting will give a 1/40sec speed for synching an electronic flash unit other than a dedicated Olympus unit.

As with other Olympus cameras the re-wind release is situated on the front of the body rather than on the baseplate.

The standard lens is the 50mm f/1.8 Zuiko. This has the aperture ring set right to the front so will need a little getting used to by photographers accustomed to other SLR cameras.

The Olympus system offers a full range of lenses and accessories - sufficient for it to be dubbed a fully professional outfit. Before buying an OM10 a trip to a dealer followed by a few 'run dry’ shots is a necessity. On its size alone this camera needs some getting used to although several other cameras are as small as the diminuitive OM series which first startled the photo world with the micro size of its equipment.
