This tiny camera is a real compact and can be slipped into even a shirt pocket and forgotten. Despite its size it has a full specification and a dedicated flash gun roughly the size of a box of matches.

When being carried around a sliding cover protects the lens, viewfinder eyepiece and the controls as well as switching the meter circuit off.

This is an aperture priority automatic with no manual override. Two cells read the light, a Silicon cell does all the work while a CdS cell provides the viewfinder information.

On the front, right of the camera body is a scale of apertures from the lens’ maximum of f/2.8, at the top, down to f/22; a slide is set against the aperture desired.

The Silicon cell above the lens then reads the light and delivers the correct shutter speed between the limits of 10 and 1/500sec, these are stepless so any speed could be given.

In the direct vision viewfinder is a brightline frame with parallax correction marks. Down the side is a scale of shutter speeds from 1 to 1/500sec, the nearest speed to the one to be used is then indicated.

Focusing is aided by the centre spot in the viewfinder. This will give a double image when the subject is out of focus. Operation of the focusing control lever below the lens, with a scale shown above will bring the two images together and the subject in focus.

The large shutter release button is on the right of the top plate. This is the lightest to fire I have ever come across - the slightest pressure sets it off so the user is advised to rest the finger beside rather than on it.

Below the lens is the film speed setting, which runs
from 25 to 800 ASA.

A delayed action self timer set by a lever on the base gives a 12 second delay which is confirmed by a flashing LED on the front and a bleeping from the PCV. This also acts as a battery check when turned to the appropriate position and a backlight exposure compensation when an extra 1V2 stops exposure is given.

The minute flash gun plugs into the side of the camera - this is an Olympus only fitting and no other gun can be used. There is no socket, nor can the unit be used on any other camera. Power is supplied by a single ‘AA’ penlight battery. The gun is attached to the camera by means of a knurled knob and screw. There are three power settings, 100 and 400ASA plus full power, clearly only intended for use with the popular colour negative films. The guide number is 36 (1 OOASA/ft).

The aperture control slide is then pushed to the top of the scale to the position marked ‘Flash’. A green indicator light pops up on the top, when this glows the gun is charged and ready to fire. To switch the gun off the lamp is pressed down to its home position.

Exposure is then automatic. Since this camera has a leaf shutter no particular synching is needed so the camera’s metering continues to operate making this combination ideal for fill-in flash work.

The 35mm f/2.8 lens on this camera gives first rate results which would do credit to many of those far more ‘sophisticated’ models.

This camera is a little awkward to operate with the tiny controls being almost too small, but despite its size it gives excellent results and really can be put away in the smallest pocket and forgotten.
