Durst became a member of the 35mm camera manufacturer with Duca in 1946, and is famous as an enlarger manufacturer, but Duca, which is extremely simple, cannot be called a full-fledged camera manufacturer. But the name is familiar to enlargers. So, I decided to put some effort into it, and as I recall, I suddenly created Automatica in 1961.
　The specs are pretty standard: it's a selenium-light auto-exposure lens shutter camera, and sadly it doesn't come with a rangefinder. If you just look at this, you might say, ``Please do whatever you want,'' but if you play around with it, you'll find a lot of interesting things. But all of them made me wonder, ``Why is this place here?''
　First of all, let's talk about the body. Anyway, it's all about Moretsu. The specifications are that of a compact camera, but the playback is comparable to that of a large single-lens reflex camera. Seriously, it's on par with Topcon RE Super. Come to think of it, they also have a square body and a front shutter. This one was released earlier, ha! Well, I guess RE Super used this camera as a reference...(←No way). So, I tried putting this camera in a Topcon Uni case, but it wouldn't fit. I was exaggerating a bit when I said it was on par with RE Super, but this case is perfect. What's so big? (ToT)
　The top surface of the warship part is finished flat, avoiding unevenness as much as possible. For this reason, the winding lever is embedded, but this axis is slightly shifted upwards, and when you try to wind it up, the lever hits the corner of the slanted back of the warship, and it automatically adjusts to that angle. The shaft will rise up, allowing you to turn the lever all the way. The winding angle is just over 180 degrees. Split winding is not possible. However, if you're going to do something strange like this, I feel like it would be better to reduce the winding angle or allow split winding. In fact, the rewind knob is also embedded, but when you press the unlock button on the bottom cover, it pops out. However, unless you keep pressing the unlock button, the gear will not become free and you cannot rewind it, so if you are going to do something strange, I would like you to do something about this.
　The back cover is a typical hinge type. You can also see the lock release lever on the left side of this camera. If I made it this way, it would be annoying to have the right hand constantly holding the camera, but for some reason most of the cameras are placed here. Kinishininikinishinai.
　When you look at it from the front, you can see the shutter button on the left side of the lens, right? There is a hole for the crab eye, so for a moment I think it is a synchronization contact, but it is a fine shutter button. Although the area is quite large and the shutter torque is not light, it doesn't feel that heavy.
　The lever on the other side is for switching between auto and manual. Turn to the right for manual, turn to the left for auto. Rotate it 180 degrees.
　The synchro contact is below the switching lever. I thought there was some trick here too, but there isn't any (^∀^)
　As you can see, the lens is a splendid one made by Schneider...I thought it was a three-element lens, but it's actually a three-element lens designed for inexpensive models. As expected, the coating has advanced a little since 1961, and magenta and amber colors are used. The helicoid has a very simple structure with a rotating front lens, and it looks cheap to match the lens. Schneider's name is crying. Aperture is f2.8 to f22. The built-in shutter is a Pronter SVS, and it has a shutter speed of B.1 to 1/300 seconds.	Durst3.jpg
　When you press the shutter on this camera, it makes a ``pop!'' sound, and you can feel a slight shock in your fingers, but the lens shutter itself should normally make a ``click'' sound when it closes. Apparently this camera has a mechanism that uses air inside the camera body, and the auto system seems to use this to change the shutter speed. In other words, it's aperture priority. I thought that most auto cameras in the past had a needle holder type shutter priority system, but there were some twists like this. Ah, but even though it's called aperture priority, this ring is directly connected to the ASA sensitivity, and if you set it to ASA100, the aperture will be set to f11 on the back side. Even though it has an Omoroi mechanism, it is very Omanu around here. By the way, to set it to auto, set the shutter speed to 1/300 seconds. This means that the air governor in the example works to change the speed according to the instructions from the exposure meter. The reason why the camera body is so big is because this mechanism is inserted into it.
　It's a camera that uses a variety of tricks, but all of them stand out, but even though it's a camera that smells like Germany in some areas, it still has an Italian side to it.