I used a medium format camera with a strange mechanism. To be honest, it's pretty big. Even though it doesn't have a focal plane shutter, it's a camera as big as a bento box (note; Dokaben...no, let's call it Dukkaben^^). If you put Dukha like the above beans next to it, it will become a seasoned plum like Gian and Suneo. However, the lens has a single lens with a fixed aperture, so it seems a bit strange. Unlike Ferrania's simple cameras, it's not very well made, but in the end it's a member of the simple camera family.
　Released in 1956, it was made some time after Duca, but this camera used a strange shutter mechanism that was not seen anywhere else. Even though it's a single-lens camera, the shutter has a range of B.1 to 1/200 seconds, and I thought, "So, is it a lens shutter?" But it's just a guillotine. But instead of Everset, the charge works in conjunction with the winding knob to charge the drive system spring inside the warship section. It's tough to roll up.	Durst66b.jpg
Durst66c.jpg	　When I disassembled it, I found that the shutter dial and the drive system were not mechanically linked in any way. However, there was a brass plate of the same size engaged under the dial, and a rubber plate between them. There was a gasket in it. If you look closely, you can see that this brass plate has holes that gradually change in size. It's still "???", but when I look at the body side, there is a hole about 1 mm in diameter below this hole, and it seems that the hole on the shutter dial side is aligned here, and the speed of the shutter is adjusted by air resistance. Looks like it's on. It's really weird.
　However, since it was made nearly 50 years ago, the rubber gasket has deteriorated and no longer serves its purpose (ToT). I'd like to do something about it since it's such an interesting mechanism, but it's sad that the speed only changes occasionally.
　The body is insect-shaped with an aluminum shell, similar to Ventini style. I guess they're trying to give it a high-class look by coating the surface with crystal paint, but the various parts look cheap, so it feels like a wasted effort. It's a red window. However, it is nice to have an optical wedge type exposure meter, although it only has four levels. Check this and decide the shutter speed based on the picture on the top. it's simple. However, it does have a synchro contact and a helicoid.
　To open and close the back cover, turn the red window rotary in the opposite direction, and the lock at the top of the back cover will come down, allowing it to be completely removed. They decided on a very fashionable design, but they wished they had attached a film pressure plate.