This is Duca, a mysterious 35mm camera released in 1947. It's very small. The shape and size are similar to that of a toad. To be more specific, the height is 105mm, the width is 40mm, and the depth is 77mm (according to actual measurements), which is impressive since you can make a 35mm camera with this. However, as expected, I use a Rapid film magazine, but the size is just a little lower in height than a normal magazine. There is nothing like a spool at all. On top of that, the lid is crimped and you can't take it apart, which is a bit of a problem. The first one is that you just push the film inside and it rolls up on its own, but there is a 5mm wide brass plate on each side that is bent into a crescent shape to make it roll smoothly. . If the film gets stuck in a strange way, you won't say 'un' or 'sung'. If you pull it too hard, you'll find pieces of film inside. And I can't take it (ToT) ← I did it.
　The lens is a single lens with no coating and is fixed at f11. The shutter is a guillotine type, and except for B, it is fixed at 1/30 seconds. If you are shooting in the middle of the day, use ASA25 film. Ah, but it has a helicoid, so you have to adjust the focal length by eye. However, there are only 1-3m and 3-∞ marks. By the way, the thing above the distance mark is not some sort of lid, but a shutter switch. In the image above, it is 1/30 second.	Duca2.jpg
　The winding is done by a lever, and I would like to give a round of applause for this in 1947, but if you think about it, there is no need to rotate the rapid magazine since there is no spool, so this lever is also just It's like sticking your nail into the hole in the cine film and pushing the film up. It wasn't particularly high level or anything. In the end, the film was fed vertically, and the composition was also vertical. Naturally, the viewfinder embedded at the top is also vertical.
　By the way, the film counter of this camera is attached to the base of the lever, and the number printed on it is 0 to 12, so you will be using 12-shot film. I didn't realize it, but all rapid film was shot with 12 frames. Well, in reality, 36 pieces in this magazine is probably small. Looks like it's going to get clogged soon.
　In addition to this blue body, DUCA was made in five colors, including regular black and red. By the way, this blue has a subtle color similar to the color of tools used in civil engineering work.
　Besides, Durst suddenly made a dark-looking camera, didn't he? (←Why do you have an accent?)