This camera has all the specifications of a top line SLR without the through the lens viewing or the facility for changing the lens. It has shutter speed priority automation with full manual override, a winder and dedicated flash gun available, the facility for multiple exposure and full viewfinder information.

Whilst not being quite in the true pocket sized class it is still small and light enough to carry around for the whole day.

The top plate is simple enough. From the user’s left to right there is a folding re-wind lever, a hot-shoe for firing a flash gun, a battery check button, lockable shutter release, which is threaded to accept a cable release, a red signal window to confirm that the film is wound on and the shutter cocked and ready to fire, the wind-on lever which operates in a single throw and lastly the frame counter. Everything is well positioned and falls readily to hand, even with the eye fixed firmly to the viewfinder.

On the front right of the body is the self timer, this is purely mechanical and runs for about 10 seconds. On the left side of the lens assembly is the multiple exposure switch. To operate this a tiny red button is pressed and the whole catch slid to the left before the film is advanced and after the shutter has been fired for the first exposure, this can be repeated as many times as desired.

On the front of the lens surround at the top is the CdS meter cell. Below the lens is the film speed selector which runs from 25 to 800ASA.
Around the lens barrel are three controls. The outer of these is for focusing, used in conjunction with a coincident image rangefinder in the centre of the viewfinder. Towards the body is the shutter speed selector, this has speeds from 1 /8 to 1 /500sec plus B, 1 /125sec is marked in green for electronic flash synchronisation even though the shutter is of the leaf variety. Lastly there is the aperture ring with its additional A marking for automatic exposure.

In the viewfinder there is a brightline frame with parallax correction marks and the rangfinder is in the centre. On the right of the frame a scale of apertures is marked. When in the auto mode a swinging needle indicates the aperture that will be used for the shot. When used in the manual mode mode, by turning the aperture ring from the A setting, an M appears in the bottom left corner of the finder frame. The aperture is then set and the shutter speed dial turned until the swinging needle points to the set aperture.

The accessory winder is about the cheapest on the market and not without good reason - it is clockwork powered. It works very well too - a few quick turns on the winding handle and it is ready for another dozen exposures, a frame at a time.

The 40mm f/2.8 Rikenon lens gives bright and razor sharp results that would not shame a top quality SLR.

This is an excellent camera that could give even the most creative of photographers many years of good service and first class results.
