Although Ricoh have never been classed as one of the leading camera makes their models have always had a lot of respect from the testing fraternity. This model has attracted considerable attention and has been one of the leading cameras around since its fairly recent introduction.

Certainly all Ricoh cameras have the look of another brand - often Nikon and if this camera had no name plate on it I would have taken it for a newcomer from that most distinguished house.

The camera itself is backed up by a winder and dedicated flash and the choice of the Pentax ‘K’ mount bayonet means that this has the widest range of lenses available. The camera comes in an all black finish and is compact, lightweight and well laid out.

There are no surprises in the lay-out of the controls. The re-wind lever folds into a knob surrounded by the film speed selector dial, this runs from 12 to 3200ASA, override of the meter reading can be carried out here and this will give up to two stops either side of the indicated setting.

The hot-shoe has an additional contact for the use of a dedicated flash unit, unfortunately this is the only means of firing a flash gun. To the right of the pentaprism is the shutter speed dial. This has manual settings from 4 to 1/1 OOOsec plus B for longer exposures, X for synching electronic flash guns at 1/90sec and auto for choosing that mode of operation.

The shutter release, which is threaded for a standard cable release is to the front and right of the shutter speed dial.

The wind-on lever must be moved out to its parked position for the meter to operate. When it is in flush with the camera body the shutter is locked and nothing will operate. A short, smooth single throw will then
advance the frame.

The front right of the body carries the mechanical self timer for delayed action shots of about 12 seconds.

Film loading is conventional enough but rather strangely on the inside of the back is an ASA/DIN conversion table.

The screen is straightforward but with the welcome addition of a diagonal split in the rangefinder meaning that both horizontal and vertical lines can be used as an aid to focusing. Exposure information is by a swinging needle to the right of the screen.

This shows the range of shutter speeds plus B, X and A. In the auto mode a green marker sets itself on the A setting then a first pressure on the shutter release brings the swinging needle up to indicate the speed that will be delivered and give correct exposure.

When the camera is set in the manual mode, by choosing a shutter speed, the green marker shows the speed set and the swinging needle shows the speed that will give correct exposure. Bringing the two into line will ensure correct exposure.

The three CdS cells provides very accurate metering. These are often regarded as a little old fashioned because of the slowness of their response but this camera helps show what an excellent metering medium they are.

This is a workmanlike unfussy camera with one of the best lenses around and a very accurate meter and speeds. All this comes at a price that is almost in the super budget class. Every section of The Good Camera Guide has a camera that gives the best value for money. This camera is probably the best value in the whole book.
