For those wanting a small, even tiny camera that is simple to use yet offers the advantage of a full frame 35mm format there are several cameras on the market. This one from Ricoh offer fully automatic, programmed exposure with no control over either aperture or shutter speed and simple focusing.

The lens is mounted on a board which folds up flush with the body when the camera is not in use. This protects the glass and switches the camera’s metering system off.

There is an aperture scale marked around the lens but for normal operation this must be set to A (auto); and the aperture should only be selected when using the flash gun in the hot-shoe mounted at the centre of the top plate.

The CdS cell on the front of the body provides the meter reading. Not only is there no control over shutter speed and aperture but there is no indication of what is being given. The only help the camera supplies is a red LED in the viewfinder which glows when the shutter speed will be less than 1/60sec. This warns that camera shake is probable and either a flash should be used or a tripod fitted to the bush on the base.

The narrow focusing ring is on the front of the lens,
before the aperture ring. There is a central circle at the 2.5 metre position (marked in the metric scale only) for general usage when the camera is required as a simple point and shoot model. On a bright day when a small aperture were in use the depth of field would take care of most situations.

The film speeds that can be set are rather limited at 25, 50, 100, 200 and 400ASA - no intermediate settings are possible which would be a problem for the user of Kodachrome 64.

The film is advanced by a single stroke on the wind-on lever. Beside the shutter release button is a socket to accept a cable release which might be needed with the shutter’s longest exposure time of two seconds.

The 35mm f/2.8 lens gives good, contrasty and sharp results and the whole camera is well laid out and pleasant to use - even though most of the controls make you wish you had fingers one size smaller. It is simple to operate and light to carry but missing just one or two features. This is a camera which can be put in a pocket, bag or briefcase, carried everywhere and almost forgotten. The fully programmed metering means that it is always ready for action with the minimum of fiddling and fuss.
