BACK TO THE FUTURE

Its aluminum body sparkles; Its look—a cross between a 1949 sci-fl film prop and a personal CD player—suggests that it will someday rest on a museum shelf. Dubbed the O-Product. this Neo Art Deco camera is Olympus' answer to the need for a picture-taking tool that's not just technically foolproof, but fashionable as well. And to make it, Olympus threw out the book on camera design and ignored all current trends. They eschewed polycarbonate in favor of an aluminum shell, and turned their back on ergonomic design, choosing instead the retro look.

Underneath the O-Product's glossy shell lurks a basic autofocus lens-shutter camera, sporting such non-revoiution-ary features as a 35mm f/3.5 auto-focus lens with a focus range of 2.5 feet to infinity, an ISO range of 25-1600 and auto-load, wind and rewind, as well as a 12-second self-timer.

The flash is somewhat more innovative It has no independent power switch—the camera turns the flash on only when it senses there's not enough available light.

From the inside, the camera looks a lot like the Olympus Infinity Jr., with a detachable flash instead of a built-in.

Olympus hopes to sell the O-Product to fashion-conscious casual shooters. Will the dedicated followers of fashion be the first on their blocks to buy a camera to go with their outfits? Will this camera make it to gadget bags or go straight to the museum?

In any case, the О isn't yet available in the U.S., but is selling in Japan for 50,000 Yen— around $400 here. With a production run of only 20,000 cameras worldwide and only 4,000 of those intended for distribution here, Olympus has guaranteed themselves a success—even if the trendies don't buy it. the camera collectors will.

Olympus' metal marvel has plastic chassis, right-hand film chamber. commemorative text. From 9 o’clock, front view shows shutter release: AF receiver. AE cell in same circle; viewfinder. AF transmitter; toggle lens cover/shutter lock; self-timer LED at 6 o'clock; lens dead center. Detachable flash has locking connector. Top view shows rewind self-timer, frame counter.

—MASON RESNICK AND KENNY YAMAMOTO