CANON T90: MOST FORMIDABLE 35mm PICTURE MAKING MACHINE EVER?

MANUFACTURERS SPECIFICATIONS: Canon T90 35mm single-lens reflex camera. Body No. 1001115. LENS: 50mm f/1.4 Canon FD In Canon breech-bayonet mount. SHUTTER: Electronically controlled vertical travel metal blade focal plane with speeds from 30 to 1/4000 sec. plus B. EXPOSURE SYSTEMS: Seven shiftable programs, shutter and aperture-preferred auto exposure both with safety shift, stopped down auto exposure, standard and stop down metered manual exposure. Dual concentric area silicon photo diode above viewfinder eyepiece measures light from focusing screen for centerweighted and central area metering. Silicon cell within mirror chamber measures light through lens for spot metering (averaging of up to 5 spot readings), ±4 stop hlghllght/shadow control, exposure lock, ±2 stop exposure compensation In 1/3 stop Increments, metering range EV 0-20 at ISO/ASA 100. FLASH: Dedicated hot shoe provides through lens, off-film measurement plus Infrared pre-flash auto-exposure control for auto exposure modes; spot metering and autolock capability, auto and manual flll-ln flash balancing with hlghllght/shadow control, manual flash, provision for sync with first or second shutter curtains for special effects, sync speeds to 1/250 sec. VIEWFINDER: Fixed eye-level prism with Interchangeable focusing screens. Standard E screen has central split-image rangefinder, mlcroprlsm collar with spotmetering Indication, outer central metering area circle, full focusing screen. Horizontal scale below screen shows segmented numerals and letters Indicating shutter speeds and apertures with out-of-range flash warning, data Imprint confirmation (with data back), error and help warnings, and AE lock. LED masked lighting shows manual Indicator, flash charge and confirmation, exposure compensation warning. Vertical dot and digital scale at right Indicates multi-spot metering, highlight and shadow control, remaining frames, flash-spot metering lock. All data can be Illuminated. OTHER FEATURES: Three micromotors provide autowlnd (to 4.5 frames per second), auto rewind, shutter, mirror diaphragm cocking; autoload with DX coding ISO/ASA 255000 with manual 6-6400 override, rear film Identification window, molded hand-contoured body; body top LCD window shows shooting mode metering pattern, loading, winding, rewinding, confirmation, shutter speed, aperture, film speed, frame counter, self-timer operation time and battery check. Panel can be Illuminated In low light, 2 or 10 sec. self timer, single or continuous shutter release, manual rewind button and battery check button all located behind door at camera body right; depth of field preview, bullt-ln viewfinder blind, sllde-on rubberized eyepiece, provision for multiple exposures, provision for data and command backs, wired and wireless remote control. BATTERIES: Four AA alkaline energizers, carbon zinc or nlcad provide all power; built-in service-station changeable BR-1225 or CR-1220 lithium battery with approx, five yr. life provides memory backup. PRICE: $702 with 50mm f/1.8 Canon; $770 with 50mm f/1.4 Canon, $920 with 50mm f/1.2 Canon. $600, body only.

At first glance it might resemble a largish piece of black marshmallow fluff or maybe a high tech Black & Decker power tool. Then you grasp this large, sensuously contoured, SLR sculpture and everything begins to make sense. Few cameras before have felt so comfortable. Gone are the sharp corners and flat sides common to most other SLRs. This is a camera that fits like a glove, balancing beautifully with each control falling exactly where it should. The camera rests in your hand rather than requiring your hand to wrap around and adjust to it—an ergonome-tric marvel.

The top cover, traditionally a horizontal flat plate, has given way to sloping shoulders. A designer’s affectation? You might think so until you are out in the sun and notice how the slanting glass cover over the generous 1 x 11/2 in. LCD information panel reflects no sunlight and doesn't show your own face bouncing back from the surface.

You hold the T-90 to your eye. Whether you wear glasses or not, the removable soft, rubberlike, rectangular eyepiece cushions nicely. You see the whole brilliant view complete with all information. If you have eyeglasses, you can use their correction to view and focus without resorting to diopter corrections (which are available as extras for diehards). Farsighted photographers will be able to view through the finder and see the top of the camera without removing and replacing eyeglasses. The astigmatic photographer can have the use of his built-in eyeglass correction.

The view provides the same ultrabright, easy to see, red digital LED numerals for shutter speeds and apertures as were available on the Canon A-1—far more recognizable than LED lit numerals found on many other SLRs. However, finder magnification has been reduced from 0.83X to 0.77X in order to make viewing the entire screen, plus information, much easier.

Technically, the T-90 is just as audacious. Can a camera be equally suitable and manageable for a beginning photographer as well as an advanced amateur or professional? Impossible? But nevertheless, the neophyte can set program exposure and let the camera autoload, set its own film speed, autowind and automatically rewind—just as in the simplest point and shoot camera. However, the professional will find a built-in 4.5 fps motor drive (powered by a superbly efficient system requiring but four AA cells as opposed to the six or eight that other SLR high-speed motor systems need).

Myriads of exposure options are all fully controllable: shutter- or aperture-preferred auto exposure; the instant choice of seven different exposure programs: three metering patterns including spot (2.7 percent of picture area), center-weighted and central area (the latter called "partial metering" by Canon and accounting for 13 percent of the area). Up to five spot readings can be averaged. The T-90 also provides exposure-memory hold and auto-exposure compensation, user variable highlight and shadow-spot control. (The serious amateurs and pros who yearned for film autoloading and were told that pro cameras simply “couldn't" now know that at least one pro camera "can".)

Old dog photographers brought up on turning shutter speed dials and aperture rings will admittedly have new tricks to learn—as they must with most sophisticated new electronic cameras. Luckily the "tricks," at least on the T-90, follow a very logical, easy to learn and understandable pattern. There are no horizontal dials to turn. The aperture ring remains at the "A" setting unless manual exposure control is required. Selection of which system you wish to adjust is made by pressing the appropriate button: meter pattern, exposure control, ISO/ASA override, multiple exposure, high or low film-advance speed, single or continuous picture taking. You hold down the proper button and turn the large vertical control wheel to change the setting: center-weighted, central area, spot reading; aperture priority, shutter priority, programs, bulb; ISO/ASA from 6 to 6400, up to nine multiple exposures, high (to 4.5 fps) or low speed (to 2 fps) film advance, auto exposure compensation (from 1/4X to 4X in 1/3 stop increments). You make changes within each category by releasing the button and turning the wheel itself, changing actual shutter speeds and apertures, for instance. Some changes in control require just the touch of one or two buttons.

One highly useful feature is the safety shift. You activate it by pressing, at the same time, both the ISO and exposure compensation buttons at the back of the camera. The camera will automatically shift the other exposure variable when you reach the end of the shutter speed or aperture range available in either shutter speed or aperture-preferred auto exposure. For instance, if you were using shutter-speed preference and had set 1/125 sec., light may have fallen below your maximum f/l.4 aperture. With SS in place, the camera would then begin to shift shutter speeds downwards automatically, to achieve a useable exposure—instead of just warning you by flashing the f/1.4 in the finder. SS is a most valuable feature in our opinion. We kept the SS on at all times.

Camera operation information is split into viewfinder readouts which show what you need to know during shooting, and top of camera LCD panel readings which you need in making decisions before you shoot. (The manufacturer's specifications at the start of this report list each informational area.) Generally, we certainly agree with Canon’s division of information, but we did find the use of bars within the viewfinder to indicate number of frames yet remaining to be less useful than just plain numbers (which do appear when you get down to nine frames to go). Additionally, all frames-to-go warnings disappear when the vertical scale at the right in the finder is used for making spot readings. (But how many SLRs have any indications of the frame count within the viewfinder at any time?)

There are some other LCD panel pieces of information that one might like within the viewfinder so switches could be made while viewing the subject: changing metering patterns, for instance. Still, what other SLR provides three such easily changeable patterns at all?

Let's get the T-90 underway. Slide the rear main switch from L to A. To open the camera for loading, press the opening button and move the lever on the side of the camera (a two-step operation to prevent accidental camera opening, yet easily accomplished, thankfully, with a single finger). The back swings open. Drop the film into the supply chamber, pull the leader across the film plane and shut the door. With a satisfying, fairly quiet whir, the T-90 quickly advances the film to frame one while the top LCD panel indicates proper loading, the DX coded ISO/ASA of the film and, when the motor stops, frame 1.

If loading hasn't been done properly (most likely cause: not pulling the leader sufficiently far across to the take-up mechanism), the loading pictograph on the LCD will blink in warning. If the film is not DX coded (almost all is now), ISO/ASA 6400 will blink wildly indicating you must set the index manually. Any settings that you made for the previous roll of film remain just as they do when you remove or replace the four AA batteries—thanks to the semi-permanent lithium memory battery (see manufacturer's specs for more on this lithium cell).

The viewfinder and LCD panels have three illuminating systems. The switch governing them is located inside a flush right hand door—along with other switches and controls that Canon feels are used less often and are best out of the way until needed.

The pictograph near the switch clearly indicates the illuminating possibilities: all finder information off, digital readout on and vertical scale illuminated from top of camera transluscent panel and lastly, digital readout on, vertical panel and top of camera LCD panel illuminated by interior lighting (quite necessary when photographing at night or whenever it’s dark directly overhead).

While the LCD panel remains on as long as the main switch isn’t at the L position, the digital numeral display and vertical LCD panel can only be seen when you press the shutter button slightly or push a button at the rear of the camera (the latter being preferable when you're changing settings at eye level). There is one way to keep the display on without maintaining pressure on the shutter release or rear button. When making multiple spot meter readings, you press a small button adjacent to the shutter release. This does cause the display to remain on without finger pressure for 30 sec., the same amount of time given for holding your spot-meter readings in memory before they are wiped. When set for internal illumination, the LCD panel light does go on automatically as you turn the control wheel, a useful touch.

While it would be nice to have the LEDs on constantly, it isn’t practical because segmented numerical LEDs burn up battery power far faster than LCDs (as any owner of a Canon A-1 will attest). Therefore Canon, while providing the visible advantages of the LEDs, has attempted to prevent unwanted and inadvertent battery drainage caused by not turning off the display. (Of course the four M cells of the T-90 are far less liable to become drained as quickly as the A-1 's single 6 volt cell.) However, having the LED numerals remain lit (without finger pressure) for 30 sec. in all cases, and the LCD panels automatically turn on their interior illumination in poor light, would have been attractive solutions. Still, one shouldn't quarrel too greatly with what may be the most visible and complete finder information system extant.

In shutter speed and aperture priority auto exposure as well as in all program modes, exposure with center-weighted metering changes with the lighting conditions. But if spot or central area metering is being used, slight pressure on the shutter release or rear illuminating button not only turns on the metering system but also locks in the reading. It’s important to remember this point. While meter memory lock is very useful for making back-lit and similar readings, you could be misled into thinking the reading wasn’t locked. In these two meter pattern settings, unless you are deliberately making central area or spot readings, it’s advisable to release finger pressure and apply it again when you're ready to take the picture in order to minimize the time between taking the stored reading and making the exposure. Meter-memory lock readings should obviously only be made when the subject to be measured is in the center of the finder area.

Spot metering provides an intriguing number of possibilities for the knowledgeable photographer. Once you shift to spot readings, the vertical scale stops indicating frames yet to be shot and instead shows just an F (film loaded) at the bottom and a spot metering scale over most of its area. When you press the shutter release, you make a single spot meter measurement which will disappear when you shoot the picture or take your finger away from the release. However, if instead you push the adjacent spot metering button, the spot metering is held in memory at the center of the scale for 30 seconds even if you don’t keep pressure on the button. The amount of variation from this spot reading can be seen by checking a second, moving bar indicating the illumination of other areas in the picture you wish to shoot. Press the button again and this reading too will be held in memory, shown on the scale, and the two readings averaged. The digital readout indicates the new averaged reading. Up to five readings can be averaged. If any one reading varies from the norm by over ± four f/stops (and therefore beyond the capabilities of the film to reproduce it), small arrows at the scale's top and bottom warn you that the spread is too great.

The spot metering has an unusual additional feature: highlight and shadow control. On the few cameras having such a feature, the exposure variations usually represent fixed amounts of exposure compensation.
Not on the T-90. You determine your own amount of compensation up to ± four stops by pushing the up or down highlight and shadow buttons on the back of the camera. We think the variable highlight and shadow-control buttons require quite accurate knowledge about the exposure latitude of each film and should be used only by those who have such or have done some experimentation with the T-90 as well as various films beforehand.

The T-90 can make aperture-preferred auto exposures in the stop down mode. Set the lens manually to the aperture you wish while in aperture-preferred, or any program mode, and push the depth-of-field stop-down lever. The digital readout within the finder indicates the shutter speed that will be set. Manual control is also possible, but regrettably without metering indication. To select full manual settings, set the LCD panel to shutter-speed-preferred auto exposure and the shutter speed you want. Now turn the aperture ring to the lens opening required. You must rely on your own judgment (or a separate exposure meter) for determining exposure in this case.

All previously available dedicated Canon autoflash units will operate with their own full dedication on the Canon T-90 (including Canon dedicated units made by other manufacturers). But not surprisingly, Canon has created a unique and highly sophisticated autoflash system for the T-90 alone, taking advantage not only of off-the-film flash measurement (first time for Canon), but also the existing light measurement, plus a near infrared pre-flash which measures the light reflected from the subject and sets both necessary shutter speed and aperture for proper exposure while balancing existing light (if present) with flash. Canon calls this system A-TTL (the "A" stands for “advanced"). To take advantage of this you need the new Canon Speedlite 300TL which sports five dedicated flash contacts instead of Canon’s usual three.

The number of autoflash modes available using the 300TL is somewhat awesome. A tyro using the T-90 as a point and shoot camera (somewhat an absurd situation but nevertheless very possible), need only slide the mode button on the flash to the P (for program) position and that's that. When he turns on the flash and the green flash indicator shines in the finder, the flash will automatically shift the camera to program, no matter what mode it’s in and the flash will operate in the A-TTL mode! Both shutter speed and aperture will be set for the flash shot. The settings will appear in the viewfinder when the shutter release is pressed slightly and the preflash goes off. If they blink on and off, the subject is out of flash range. The flash system automatically monitors both flash and existing light to give you a proper balance.

For more control over your flash destinies, you switch from program to mode position and push the button. With the A-TTL mode thus set you can still get the benefits of program exposure by setting the camera for it, but the advanced benefits of A-TTL are more visible if you use either shutter speed preferred or aperture preferred autoexposure and flash.

The purpose of using A-TTL plus shutter speed or aperture preferred automation is to allow you to set one or the other at precisely the speed or opening you wish and then get exact balance from the existing light present. However, should you set a shutter speed above 1/250 sec., the top sync, speed, the system will reset your shutter speed to 1/250 sec. If neither shutter speed nor aperture blink after the preflash your exposure will be correct and balanced with the existing light. If there is blinking in shutter-speed-preferred auto exposure, you had better reset to a slower shutter speed until blinking stops. In aperture-preferred auto exposure when there's any existing light present, you will often get proper exposure no matter what lens opening is selected. However, the shutter speed in low light may be very long indeed—up to 30 sec. A tripod may be called for but the result will inevitably be proper exposure even if the flash has little or no effect at all because you've selected a tiny aperture. The 300TL's flash exposure is determined by three measurements: 
1) the Т-90's centerweighted existing light metering measures overall scene illumination. 
2) The 300TL emits a subdued pre-exposure near-infrared flash to measure camera-to-subject distance and subject reflectivity. From these two readings, the camera determines the proper shutter speed and aperture. 
3) During exposure the silicon cell within the camera mirror chamber measures the illumination from the film surface during exposure and stops the flash output the instant the correct illumination has been attained.

When the 300TL's flash head is turned in a direction other than straight ahead, the main flash tube itself provides a pre-exposure measuring flash burst of 1 /20th its normal full output. This allows the flash unit to measure the effects of pre-exposure bounce flash instead of using the unit’s usual direct preflash, which for bounce would, of course, be useless).

While there is a green flash-ready lightning bolt signal in the viewfinder, a post exposure confirmation indication isn't necessary since you already know if exposure is correct before you make the picture!

For the first time, spot readings can be made for flash using the camera's spot meter reading ability. Such readings can be made in program, shutter speed preferred or aperture preferred modes. Spot reading allows you to make a pre-exposure flash distance reading of a subject not in the center of the picture using 1/20th of the flash unit’s main power. You can hold this reading for up to 30 sec. and release the shutter with any revised composition you want—a first time in SLR autoflash photography. Additionally, using the highlight and shadow buttons at the back of the T-90, you can vary the lighting ratio between existing light and the off-center main flash subject precisely as you wish. The spot flash reading is also useful if the main subject is centrally located but is rather small or against a contrasting light or dark background that might seriously affect a regular flash exposure reading.

Besides its automatic exposure modes, the 300TL also allows manual flash exposure of both high and low intensity.

Put succinctly, no camera and flash unit has ever offered such automatic flexibility. However, it's obvious that you must study and experiment to get the most out of this very comprehensive flash system.

The 300TL has a manually set rotating and bounce zoom head covering lenses from 24mm upwards, provides standard or automatic-off energy saving circuitry after five minutes of non-use, allows full or low-power autoflash illumination, is powered by four AA cells and can be combined with other Canon dedicated flash units for wired multiple autoflash.

The 300TL has another unique feature. You can set the flash to go off with either the first or second shutter curtain. Most flash units on other cameras go off as the first curtain opens. But if you are photographing a moving object with lights and want its flash image to appear at the end of the streaks of existing light, thp flash must be synced with the second shutter curtain. A simple shift of a switch does it on the 300TL. Important? Not usually, but who knows when it might come in handy?

With ISO/ASA100 film the 24mm setting in program mode extends from 18 in. to 41 ft. while at the 85mm flash head position you can get to 65 ft. Manual guide number with a 50mm lens and ISO/ASA 100 film is 114. Recycling in auto flash modes varies from 0.2 sec. to 13 sec. with alkaline energizer batteries which provide between 100 and 700 exposures.

The flash provided excellent results with very good, even coverage. While one might argue that occasionally a good deal of calculation might corns up with a better existing light—flash balance, by and large we were most pleased with results that we achieved in no time flat with no calculations at all. We unashamedly admit that program flash with the T-90 and 300TL system will be hard for any other camera system to equal, much less beat.

The pre-flash can require a bit of getting used to—for photographer and subject both. If you are operating fast, the pre-flash and flash itself occur almost simultaneously However, if you want to make a pre-flash reading and then consider it before you make the final shot, the subject may be fooled into thinking the pre-flash was the exposure and just walk away.

The pre-flash silicon cell at the front of the camera covers about 18 degrees, about equal to the coverage of a 150mm lens. This would seem to be quite a good choice. However, to compensate for parallax (the fact that the cell is considerably above the camera lens position) it points down slightly. At most flash distances, the angled cell is of little consequence. However, at very great distances, beyond the flash’s range, the cell can pick up reflections from the foreground, such as a road, and give an indication of correct exposure even if this wasn’t possible (though we did find the claimed flash range to be conservative). If you do intend to shoot much flash at great distances or to mix high levels of existing light with flash, practicing with the T-90 and flash will ensure consistent results.

The pre-flash setting system has a nice additional advantage. Should one or the other of the controls—aperture or shutter speed—cause viewfinder numeral blinking, you needn't try to correct it and then take another pre-exposure flash. Instead you can hold the reading using the shutter button or pre-exposure readout button and turn the control wheel to a more equitable setting at which the numbers will cease pulsating.

In actual field tests, the T-90 behaved in an exemplary manner. We quickly learned that not only sequence shots but also single pictures were best handled in the “cont" (for continuous) mode. With advance set to the "single" position we found that it was necessary to take our finger off the shutter release button entirely before we could press it down again for the next exposure. In “cont,” we were able to let up on finger pressure slightly after the initial shot was made and then bring pressure to bear again for the next shot. With a little practice, we could fire off single shots quite efficiently in this manner without shooting a sequence by mistake. In our tests we timed the high speed motor drive at 4.43 fps at high shutter speeds with fresh alkaline energizers. After about 30 rolls and much use of the exposure metering systems, top speed dropped to 3.5 fps. Ergo, if you need the highest speed, by all means use fresh batteries. The 2 fps setting when checked revealed the actual speed was 1.9 fps, quite acceptable. Rewinding a 36-exposure roll with fresh batteries required but 11 sec. and took place automatically following the last exposure on the roll.


