Lindenblatt KL-2
LINDENBLATT KL-2

　The SIMCO LS-1 was produced by taking over the camera and lens blueprints and machine tools from Tokyo Kogaku, but interestingly, OEM models from overseas brands are rarely seen. This camera is a Lindenblatt KL-2 that was ordered from Cambridge Camera in the United States, and there are almost no changes other than the glued nameplate, but a small change has been made to the countersunk screw on the winding lever shaft cover. . Also, unlike Shimco, where the model name was printed directly on the warship section, Lindenblatt has a board with letters printed on it attached to the main body side of the warship section. From this point of view, Cima may have been planning to change this camera to various brands and model names and produce it on an OEM basis, but no other Lindenblatt models have been confirmed so far.
　In the late 1980s, Simco went into financial trouble, and its blueprints and assembly equipment were transferred to a Chinese factory, where exactly the same products were produced locally. However, it seems that there was a problem with the material of the parts, and the failure rate was high, making it difficult for the product to become a viable product. For a time, Chinese-made SIMCO was sold through Yahoo Auctions and other sites. Additionally, in China, a model called DC-1, a TTL manual machine, was made using the brand name ``SEAMA'', but this model also had poor precision parts and many of them now seem to be out of order.
Development of AM-1 which is a new model was ended mostly for 81 years which the Tokyo optical Co. withdrew from 35mm camera industry for general. The Cima which succeeded it sold this camera in 83. Although there are few changed parts, it is almost the same as AM-1. Cimko lenses put on the market those were same as AM Topcor lenses. But the Cima produced many original lenses late. It can be told to this camera that the blood of TOPCON is flowing. In addition, this camera changed the name "Lindenblatt KL-2", and was put on the market in the United States.