The Minds at Minolta pride themselves on firsts. From the first Japanese camera with front focusing (the Nifca-Dox), to the first 35mm camera with a built-in scaled CdS meter (SR-7), to the first camera with an integral motor drive (SR-M), to the first multi-exposure mode SLR (XD-11), to the first successful autofocus SLR (Maxxurn 7000), Minolta has established a tradition of firsts that goes back decades. What’s remarkable, though, is that Minolta’s firsts tend to be such success-fill firsts. It’s one thing to be first at something; it’s another thing entirely to be first at something and to have done a bang-up job on it, too. It appears that the Minds at Minolta have done it again - this time with the Vectis S-l, the first APS SLR.

The Vectis S-l is the flagship of Minolta’s APS line. It’s sleek, it’s stylish in a sci-fi sort of way, it’s compact and undeniably elegant, yet it’s crammed full of features. Unlike the other two interchangeable-lens APS SLRs currently available, the Canon EOS IX and the Nikon Pronea 6i, the Vectis sports a unique lens mount, downsized slightly for the smaller APS film. To accompany the Vectis, Minolta has developed a new, compact line of lenses. In a departure from Maxxurn lens designs, each Vectis lens houses two motors: one for focusing and another for stopping down the aper-
ture iris. At the time of this writing, available optics consist of four zooms: a 22-80mm f/4-5.6, 28-56mm f/4-5.6, 56-170mm f/4.5-5.6, and an 80-240mm f/4.5-5.6 APO, plus a 50mm f/3.5 Macro lens. A prototype 400mm f/8 reflex has been shown, but there is no information yet as to if or when it will be released. Rumors are that Minolta plans to offer an adapter for the Vectis that will allow the use of Maxxum AF lenses, but they will have limited functionality: no autofocusing and no program mode selection (although shutter-and aperture-priority as well as metered manual should be available).

The most distinguishing characteristic of the Vectis S-l, and that which is responsible for its sleek lines, is its lack of a pentaprism bump. Minolta opted instead for a “sidefinder” design, where the light path from the lens to the eyepiece is folded horizontally. So successful at this design were they that the viewfinder is the brightest in its class. This sidefinder design results in an eyepiece which is positioned at the far left edge of the camera, however - great for us right-eyed shooters, but perhaps somewhat less wonderful for the dominant left-eye shooters among us. The eyepiece is fitted with a dioptric adjustment, providing the user with a a generous +2 to -4 range of correction. For those who prefer to wear their glasses, though, the finder is of the high-eyepoint design, with a full 25mm of eye-relief. The viewfinder uses opaque masks for the H, C, and P formats.

The Vectis has a single autofocusing mode: focus-priority only, and a solitary AF sensor that is sensitive primarily to vertical subjects. Available exposure modes include program AE, shutter- and aperture-priority AE, and metered manual, plus five Subject Program Modes: Portrait, Landscape/Night View, Close-Up, Night Portrait, and Sports Action.
Available metering modes include a 14-segment evaluative method and a 4mm spot. Exposure compensation is also available in half-stop increments, with a total range of ±3 EV. Shutter speeds range from 30 seconds to 1/2000 second, with flash sync occurring at 1/125. The flash system on the Vectis uses a four-segment TTL pattern. The built-in pop-up flash covers focal lengths down to 22mm and offers red-eye reduction. Manual fill flash and slow-shutter sync are also available. The Vectis S-l has a Maxxum-style hot shoe, and can accept any Maxxum flash unit. It also has the capability to support a remote control accessory TTL flash.

APS features supported on the Vectis include the Fixed Time Print Mode (see the above APS section for an explanation of this and the other APS features), 0-9 print quantity selection, back printing of date and time, a choice of 100 titles in various languages, with any three held in memory, to be printed. If no title is printed, then the shutter speed, film speed, lens focal length, and exposure compensation (if any) can be printed.

Other features include the following: the S-l has a “splash proof’ design, which means it’s moisture resistant, but won’t survive a dunking; it has manual override of ISO film speed settings; its integral winder is good for film advance speeds up to 1 fps; it has wireless remote control capability.
