Minolta have two distinct ranges of cameras, the XDs and the XGs. The most recent model in the latter line is the aperture priority with manual override XG-M.

In the United States Minolta have long been recognised as one of the leading brands of camera, however they never seem to have had the success they deserve in Europe. The XG-M should do their reputation no harm at all throughout the world.

The heart of the metering system are two CdS cells, one each side of the viewfiinder eyepiece. This may cause a few eyebrows to raise - after all for several years CdS has been thought of as a little old fashioned with allegations about its slow response and the memory that the cells acquire after a period in low light. Certainly the metering of this camera works as well as any other and does tend to make me believe that CdS could well be a far better metering medium than it has been given credit for.

This is the first of the XG series to offer metering in the manual mode. To do this a shutter speed is selected on the conventionally placed dial and an aperture set on the lens. The shutter speed that would give a correct exposure is indicated in the viewfinder by an illuminated LED, the eye must then be moved from the finder to see what is set on the selector dial. As a reminder an M lights up as well. The range of speeds that can be set in the manual mode is from 1 to 1/1000sec plus B.

To move into the automatic mode the shutter speed dial is turned to A then the correct speed for the aperture selected will be delivered steplessly. The nearest speed is indicated by an LED in the finder. There are also indications for under and over exposure.

The power on/off switch is located around the speed dial. To get a viewfinder read-out the finger must be placed on the shutter release, the moisture on that finger then completes a circuit and the lights illuminate. If gloves are being worn then a slight first pressure will
have the same effect. The shutter release is at the centre of the shutter speed dial so all these facilities are grouped together and can be operated easily with the right hand.

In the auto mode the exposure can be overriden up to two stops either way by a dial around the re-wind knob, this also has a cut-out for the film speed selector which runs from 25 to 1600ASA.

Flash can be synchronised from either the hot-shoe, which has an additional contact for the use of dedicated units, or by a P/C socket on the left side of the lens mounting.

On the right side of the mounting is the switch for the self timer, this is lifted and the shutter released in the normal way. There is also a stop-down button for previewing depth of field. The right hand side of the body is raised to form a hand grip, this is purely cosmetic and performs no function.

Along with the XG-M Minolta released a new winder. Many users of previous XG series cameras discovered that increasing the voltage would give a speed greater than its rated two frames per second. The new model takes more batteries and gives a maximum three and a half frames per second.

One feature of the Minolta system is the Acute Matte screens. These give the best and clearest viewing I have seen and sharp focus ‘snaps’ in even the lowest of light levels.

This model has not really broken any new ground. It seems likely that this is a halfway step to something else from this producer of excellent cameras. Possibly a model with different metering cells, fuller manual metering, interchangeable screens and a full five frames per second motor drive. In the meantime this camera will certainly give first rate service at a reasonable price.
