Maxxum 800si

The 800si continues in the tradition - if such a word can even be used with modern photo technology - begun with the 7xi and continued with its most immediate predecessor, the 700si. Like
its forerunners, the 800si features the latest generation of Minolta’s Omnidirectional Predictive Focus Control (see the 7xi for a complete explanation of this feature’s capabilities), as well as the same four-CCD phase detection sensor array as used on the 700si.

In addition to the above-mentioned AF system features, the 800si offers : single-shot AF, continuous AF, or the automatic selection of either depending upon subject movement.

The 800si employs Minolta’s well-designed 14-segment honeycomb pattern metering system for evaluative, spot (5.5mm, 2.7% viewfinder area), and cen-terweighted averaging metering.

Exposure modes include program with Expert Program Selection (P mode), aperture-priority program (PA mode), shutter priority program (PS mode), aperture-priority AE, shutter-priority AE, and metered manual. In addition, the 800si has five Subject Program Selection modes: Portrait, Landscape, Close-up, Sports, and Night Portrait/ Night View.

Additional exposure options include ±	3 EV exposure compensation

in 1/2-step increments, ± 3 EV flash compensation, three, five, or seven step auto- and flash bracketing, and AE lock.

The 800si sports the most powerful built-in flash in its class with a guide number of 66 at the telephoto setting (45 at 24mm) and autozooming capability. Also available with the built-in flash and dedicated accessory units is redeye reduction, second curtain sync, fill flash, and fill flash with redeye reduction.

Also found on the 800si are 16 custom functions, including three user preference settings, and a data memory function that will store up to ten 39-exposure rolls worth of data.

Shutter speeds range from 30 seconds to 1/8000 second, plus B, with flash sync occuring at 1/200 second.
The built-in winder advances features settings for single-frame advance, continuous advance (3 frames per second), exposure/flash bracketing (3, 5, 7 exposures), and multiple exposure (2 - 9 exposures). Other features include a self-timer, diopter adjustment, depth-of-field preview, a remote release terminal, and a threaded PC connector. Addition of the vertical control grip provides the user with the option of using four AA size alkaline batteries, NiCd batteries, or one 6v (2CR5) lithium battery. The vertical control grip has a vertical shutter-release button, an on/off swithc; a PC terminal, and an AE-lock button.
