This camera has far more of the facilities we are used to seeing on a full size SLR with one important exception - it does not have interchangeable lenses. To overcome this problem it is fitted with a fixed zoom lens as standard.

Exposure metering is fully automatic and uses the aperture priority method. Rather strangely the aperture is set on a dial at the left hand end of the top plate. The camera’s TTL metering system which relies on a CdS cell will then deliver the correct shutter speed.

The other end of this dial offers exposure compensation of up to two stops either way. The hot-shoe right on top of the pentaprism has an additional contact for the use of any of the Minolta ‘X’ series dedicated flash guns.

On the right hand of the prism is the mode selector dial which surrounds the shutter release, this is threaded to accept a cable release. The positions marked are L for locked, X for the use of non-dedicated flash guns at the synching speed of 1 /125, A for automatic operation - the only form of operation - and B for exposures longer than the metering system’s conservative 1/4 sec maximum.

Just in front of the dial is a switch which projects over the edge of the body, this has two positions; BC for checking that the battery is full of life and ST for the 10 sec delayed action self timer which is confirmed by a flashing LED on the front of the switch itself.

The zoom lens will give any focal length of between 25 and 67mm and has a maximum aperture of f/3.5. This is about the same range as would be covered by a 50-135mm lens on a full frame 35mm camera.

Normally the closest focusing is at 3.6ft but for close-up work a switch on top of the lens is flicked and the camera will then operate as close as 71/2ins.

Since this is a tiny camera, Minolta have thoughtfully provided a large hand-grip which fits on the right hand end of the camera body to give a firm, positive hold for those with man-sized hands.

Focusing is carried out with a split image centre spot which is on a matt field.

Down the left hand edge of the frame, in a darkened area, runs a scale of the shutter speeds. Besides these are a series of LEDs indicating the speed which will give correct exposure as well as under and over exposure marks.

Windingon is carried out by a conventional lever-a single stroke is all that is needed.

This is a pleasant camera to use and will find favour with the users of 35mm SLR cameras - apart from the strange aperture selection control all the features are positioned where they would be expected.

The metal shutter is behind the lens and certainly gives accurate enough exposures to make the camera thoroughly reliable.

Two control rings operate the lens; one for focusing and the other for altering the focal length. The results this gives are quite up to the limitations of the tiny negative size and the majority of users who take mostly colour negative films and do not want giant enlargements made will be delighted.

Although you would need a large pocket to stow this camera away it is still fairly small and gives fine results - if you like 110 you’ll be very satisfied with the Minolta.
