The Minolta 110 Zoom SLR, the first of the four 110-format SLR camera models ever made, was not a great success. Although an able instrument, it didn’t fly off the shelves. Introduced in 1976, it was promptly killed and, by 1979, replaced by a sibling, the 110 Zoom Mark II. The name on the 2nd camera body is the same as the early model, with a Mark II embossed in the front by the aperture dial.

There are a few features common to both models, but many more differences.

Common is obviously the film format. So is the shooting mode, being automatic, aperture preference, stepless shutter speed, and zoom lens.

Dissimilarities, with no particular order:

Here there is a camera that looks like a camera, unlike its predecessor’s odd shape.
The location of the winder lever is still at the bottom but counter-intuitive, used by the left hand.
Unlike its older sister, which could shoot at X or B without power, this model is dead without a battery.
The camera is tiny. There is little room to get a firm hold with one hand, so it has a detachable grip as a standard accessory.
The camera’s rear-end is lighter than the front lens barrel, so it feels uneven to maneuver.
Where the previous model was dead simple to use, it takes to have a manual at hand for this one.
Here an approximate shutter speed shows in the viewer, augmented by over / under arrow indicators. In the earlier model, it was not indicated.
Light measuring here is through the lens, whereas the earlier model was external measuring
It takes a finger dance to grasp the focusing and the zoom dials, set very close together.
Added is a diopter adjustment by a lever above the viewer window.
A lever at that window’s left also set a drop curtain to block the viewer while shooting at B.
The body is plastic; the earlier model was metal.
Further notes:

BC/ST lever at the front, by the mode selector, toggles between battery check and self-timer. The red light by it lites up if the battery is good and when the timer is engaged.
To change the shooting mode, press the white bulge towards the center. From X or B, it freely slides back into A.
The exposure compensation setting is on the left dial, surrounding the aperture setting. Pull and turn the outer ring and change.
The camera is not of great importance for the collector. It is not readily offered for sale, and if it is, at an exorbitant price. It is nice to have an exemplar, unique in a way. Not much online presence, so assume it is of little interest.