Maxxum 7xi

Minolta inserted a new term into the still photographer’s lexicon when the
Maxxum 7xi was released - frizzy logic. Already a familiar concept to many computer experts and camcorder users, fuzzy logic is a computer algorithm that differs from digital logic by allowing for gradations between the absolute states of on or off. Put in terms more amenable to the photographer, if we let “on” represent white and “off’ represent black, then fuzzy logic can interpret the gray scale in between these two absolute values, whereas digital logic cannot (at least, not without lots of added subroutines and more memory requirements). Thus, by incorporating fuzzy logic into the 7xi, Minolta has come up with a memory-management scheme that makes much more efficient use of the camera’s computer memory than would be possible using conventional digital logic alone. But, in order to make the most effective use of frizzy logic with the camera’s various “Expert” features, the Minds at Minolta knew a more powerful on-board computer would be needed. In computerese, the heavier requirements led to the adoption of a 16-bit CPU running at a clock speed of 20 MHz, with 64 kilobytes of ROM and 2 kilobytes of RAM. It wasn’t all that long ago when specs like these would have been impressive for a full-sized desktop computer. The 7000i, by comparison, sports an 8-bit 10.5 Mhz CPU, with only 20 kilobytes of ROM and 640 bytes of RAM. In plain English, the Maxxum 7xi has roughly four times the computing speed and three times
the memory capacity of earlier i-series models.

According to Minolta, the Maxxum 7xi focuses twice as fast as its i-series .predecessors. Partially responsible for this feat is its ultra wide angle phase-detection system, which has four high-density CCD sensors.

The 7xi’s wide-area autofocusing system will switch automatically between sensors depending on subject location or movement. It will also switch sensors automatically to accommodate horizontal or vertical subjects. And, if the user desires, he or she may select any of the four sensors at any time. Autofocus modes are single shot (focus priority) and continuous predictive autofocus. Manual focus is assisted with a focus confirmation indicator in the viewfinder. Like most other advanced AF SLRs, the 7xi will detect subject movement and switch automatically to continuous predictive autofocus. A system called Omnidirectional Predictive Focus Control will track a subject moving at variable rates of speed in three-dimensional space as fast as 187 miles an hour (that’s 300 kilometers an hour for you metric-minded folks). What this means is that not only will the camera track fast-moving subjects, but it will track them as they accelerate, decelerate, change direction, or all of the above. Assuming you can track a subject with these kind of moves, you can get off more than one shot. The built-in motor drive will burn through a roll of film at the respectable rate of four frames a second.

Whether tracking a fast-moving subject or framing a carefully composed still life, the way an auto-exposure camera’s meter responds to light is crucial. Thus, to accommodate most any exposure situation, the 7xi’s meter employs a 14-zone honeycomb pattern (13 hexagonal segments plus the background). The 7xi’s computer, using the fuzzy logic algorithm, determines the precise metering pattern and the weighting each of the 14 segments is given. The metering pattern and spot metering (the center hexagonal segment only) are available in all exposure modes, including manual.

To complement the 7xi’s advanced metering capabilities, a variety of exposure modes are available. Perhaps the most significant of these is the Expert Program Selection mode. Exposure in this mode is determined based on a number of variables, including lens focal length, subject type, size, movement and distance from the camera. Expert program can be overridden to an “expert” aperture- or shutter-priority mode, which is really just a program shift feature but which allows the photographer to fine tune either shutter speeds or apertures without having to leave the program mode. Standard shutter and aperture-priority AE modes are also available, as is full-metered manual. Other exposure features include exposure compensation, an AE lock, and additional custom exposure control through the use of Minolta’s Creative Expansion Cards.

Another feature introduced with the 7xi and unique to xi-series cameras, is the Eye-Start System, a feature which switches on the camera when you pick it up and activates several things at once when you bring it to your eye. Specifically, a pressure switch in the camera’s grip detects when its been gripped, which triggers an infrared sensor at the eyepiece. When this sensor detects an object (your face, for example), the camera comes to life and, if you have an xi-series zoom attached, three things happen: the meter evaluates the scene, the AF system decides what your likely subject is and focuses on it, and the ASZ system (more on that in just a second) automatically zooms the lens to a starting focal length. If you’re not prepared for all this the first time you pick up one of these cameras, having it suddenly
spring to life in your hands can be a bit startling.

With an xi-series Autozoom lens attached to the 7xi, the user has four Expert Autozoom functions at his or her disposal: ASZ, APZ, Image Size Lock, and 150% Wide View Mode. ASZ (Auto-Standby Zoom), is automatically activated by the Eye-Start System, which selects a focal length based on subject distance. APZ (Auto Program Zoom), continuously sets focal length based on changing subject position (currently available only with the “Child” Creative Expansion Card). Image Size Lock is a continuous focal-length adjustment which maintains image size while a subject is moving. Wide-View Modeis a focal-length reset which allows viewing of 50% more of the picture area until the shutter release is pressed partway down.

Shutter speeds range from 30 seconds to 1/8000 second, plus B, and can be selected in half-stop increments. Flash sync tops out at 1/200 using either the •built-in TTL flash (GN 40 @ ISO 100) or dedicated accessory units. Other features include DX film coding with override, a self-timer, a remote-control socket, auto film loading and rewind with mid-roll rewind. The built-in motor has single-frame, 2 fps and 4 fps settings.
