Maxxum 9xi

In the high-stakes game of hi-tech camera one-upsmanship, Minolta put together another winning combination with the 9xi. Instead of repeating all the details about Minolta’s xi technolog)' that have already been explained under the 7xi’s heading, we’ll take a look at what sets the 9xi apart from the other xi cameras.

First of all, almost all the features found on the 7xi exist on the 9xi. Only a few amateur oriented ones, such as the built-in pop-up flash and autozooming composition mode, have been dropped. While the body’s styling is very close to
that of the 7xi, there are both major and minor differences. Minor differences, such as the addition of leatherette coverings to the front, are a nice touch. Major differences are much more than cosmetic. The 9xi’s body is made up of several durable sub-components. The mirror box is made from stainless steel and zinc, and is coupled to a cast zinc baseplate. Where polycarbonate is used, it is of the fiber-reinforced variety. The controls are well-sealed against moisture and dust intrusion.

When it was introduced, the 9xi supplanted the 7xi as the fastest-focusing SLR in the industry. And, even when judged by today’s state-of-the-art, cutting edge standards, the 9xi is still a very capable performer. Although both the 9xi and 7xi share the same fuzzy logic autofocus technology, AF sensors and autofocus mechanisms, the 9xi has an improved mirror-return mechanism over the 7xi, which allows the 9xi to begin autofocusing between exposures sooner than the 7xi. As a direct result of this, the integral motor will run through a roll of film at 4.5 frames per second when shooting in the predictive omnidirectional auto focus mode (the 7xi is good for “only” 4 fps when in this mode).

Because the 9xi performs autofocus with such speed, the default AF mode is focus priority; that is, the camera will not fire until the subject is in focus. This default can be overridden, however, by shutting off the camera, then depressing the self-timer button while turning the camera back on.
Even a couple of years after its discontinuation, the 9xi is still on the top of the technological heap in another category. Its highest shutter speed is 1/12,000 second and its highest flash sync speed is 1/300 second when using the 3500xi, the 5400xi, or the 5400HSS flash (1/250 second for non-dedicated flash units, including studio strobes). Its slowest shutter speed is 30 seconds.

Other features include a threaded PC sync terminal, a genuine depth-of-field preview lever, built-in eyepiece diopter correction, a variety of TTL flash options (including off-the-camera, cordless flash), and a “quick-adjust” button, which allows the user to customize override settings for the various controls.

The built-in motor drive has a highspeed rewind mode that will suck the leader back into a 36-exposure roll’s cassette in under six seconds. A much quieter and only slightly slower rewind mode is also available for times when the high-speed mode’s noise may be intrusive.

Five new Creative Expansion Cards were introduced with the 9xi: the Bracketing Card 2, the Auto Shift Card 2, the Sports Action Card 2, the Fantasy Effect Card 2 and the Memory Card 2. The Bracketing Card 2 allows for autobracketing of exposures with both ambient and flash, providing ’/3, ’/2 or full-stop exposure increments, and frame counts of 3, 5, or 7. The Auto Shift Card 2 is an automated “program shift” feature, allowing the user to fire off three frames at varying shutter-speed/aperture combinations, while retaining the same overall exposure. The Fantasy Effect Card 2 defocuses the lens during exposure, thereby providing a soft-focus effect. The Sports Action Card 2 biases the program toward higher, action-stopping shutter speeds. The Data Memory Card 2 will memorize up to four rolls of
film’s worth of exposure data, and will then play it back to the user via the LCD display.
