Maxxum HTsi and XTsi

One remarkable aspect of today’s entry-level camera market is it would appear that the manufacturers are in a race with each other to see how many features they can cram into their selections, while maintaining that under $300 price point. For this reason, Minolta deserves a tip of the hat for its efforts on the HTsi. Priced only moderately higher, the XTsi is clad in the brushed chrome and black look and includes a few nice additions we’ll examine shortly. The HTsi has three autofocus sensors -two vertical CCD side sensors and one crosshair-type CCD sensor in the center, providing the user with a wide focusing area. The camera will switch automatically between focus lock and continuouis predictive AF based on sobject movement. One can choose between auto or manual focus via a selector switch.

The HTsi uses Minolta’s sophisticated 14-segment honeycomb-pattern system. Spot (5.5%) is avialable, as is TTL OTF flash metering with the built-in unit (GN 39 in ft. at ISO 100, cover-
age down to 28mm) or dedicated accessory flash units.

Exposure modes include program AE, 5 Subject Programs portrait, landscape, close-up, sports/action, night portrait), and 3 Creative Expansion Control Programs (aperture priority, shutter priority, and manual). Exposure compensation is available, with a total of ± 3 EV of adjustment in 1/2-step increments. 3-shot AE bracketing is also available in 1/2 EV steps.

And if all that wasn’t enough, the HTsi comes with nine built in custom functions, which allow the user to customize the camera’s configuration to his or her own set of preferences.

Shutter speeds range from 30 seconds to 1/4000 second, plus B, with flash sync at 1/125 second (up to 1/4000 second with the 5400HS flash). The built-in winder advances film at the rate of 2 frames per second. Other features include DX film coding with override, a self timer, and AE lock.

The XTsi has all die above, plus Minolta’s Eye Start system, ten custom functions (compared to the HTsi’s nine), panoramic capability (via a side switch), a remote-release terminal, a databack, and a stainless steel lens mount (the HTsi’s is plastic).
