Previously Leica had a tie-up with Minolta, now that has terminated and we are left with the Minolta CLE, an automatic version of the old Leica CL. This is a first rate camera in its own right and well worth considering.

In a way this camera bridges the gap between SLRs and compacts - it is a rangefinder model but has interchangeable lenses - even though the choice is rather limited. The viewfinder has a brightline frame within it, as each of the three available lenses is mounted, a sensor on the camera ‘feels’ the lens and adjusts the brightline so that it matches the field of view of the optic fitted. The lenses available are a 40mm f/2, 28mm f/2.8 and a 90mm f/4. Also available is a dedicated flash gun which completes a handy little system.

The main advantages of these cameras is their size, they have no bulky lump on the top for a pentaprism, and the silence of their operation - the photographer who is used to an SLR may find that he is not even sure that the shutter has fired.

The metering is through the lens and is read from a pattern on the front shutter blind - similar to the Olympus system but one that Minolta devised and first patented.

Setting the camera for auto operation is a simple matter of lining an A on the shutter speed dial against the marker. Choosing the speed gives manual working and the range of speeds available is from 1 to 1 /1000 sec. There is also a B position. The X electronic flash synchronisation speed is at 1/60 sec. Compensation for awkward lighting runs around the dial and the film speed selector is shown within it.

The hot-shoe is at the centre of the top plate and has
two additional contacts for the use of the dedicated flash unit.

The shutter release is in the centre of the shutter speed dial, slight pressure on this activates the metering system. This has to be the merest touch since an electronic circuit detects the moisture on a finger and sets things in motion.

There is no cable release socket on this camera but remote firing can be carried out with an accessory electronic cable. The wind-on lever and the frame counter complete the controls on the top of the camera.

The re-wind lever is on the base of the camera together with the battery housing, tripod bush and battery check. There is also a self timer which runs for 10 seconds and is confirmed by a flashing LED.

The centre of the viewfinder has a coincident image rangefinder for focusing. A series of LEDs run down the left side of the frame against the marked shutter speeds in auto operation and the appropriate speed to the aperture set on the lens will glow.

As an alternative to an SLR this is a first class but rather expensive option. It is a lovely camera to use, is well laid out and gives superb results. Those wanting almost silent operation will find it ideal and those wanting a sophisticated piece of equipment that they can slip into a pocket will also be very satisfied.

This camera is rather limited, there is no winder available and the lens choice is basic but I suspect that there will soon be a dedicated band of CLE followers who won’t hear a word spoken against it.
