This is a true underwater camera which can be used to a depth of around six feet. It does not have to be used in the sea or the pool but could just as easily be taken on the beach where it could be buried in the sand without coming to any harm.

This camera uses the 110 format so the results will only be suitable for enlargement to around postcard size. It comes with a budget price tag and since it is designed for use on the beach or in the water is not likely to be used very often. It has very basic exposure control, simple focusing and built-in flash.

The act of inserting the cartridge in the well sealed and double layered camera back lines a sensor up with a cut-out notch on the edge. This ‘tells’ the camera what speed is being used, either 100 or 400ASA and adjusts the exposure and flash accordingly. On the top plate of the camera is a three position switch for exposure. Like all the controls this is large and chunky and easy to locate and operate, even under water. The first position turns on the electric flash gun; when this is fully charged and ready to fire a neon lamp blinks on the camera back. This can be used to a range of around 12 feet with 100ASA film loaded. The other two symbols are the almost standard symbols for sunny and cloudy weather and complete the basic exposure
system.

Next to this is the large focusing knob with five zone focusing symbols. The information is repeated in the viewfinder as a useful reminder. The only other feature on the top plate is the shutter release button. This requires a real effort to fire because this is an underwater camera. Even a few feet below the surface the pressure really builds up - to such an extent that a light shutter button would be set off by it.

The lens is a 26mm f/3.5 which gives results as good as any on a 110 camera and the results seem fine underwater also.

The wind-on lever is on the base, this is larger than the user of 35mm cameras will be used to and advances the film and cocks the shutter in a single throw.

The back is held in place by a large catch on each end of the body.

To complete the outfit the camera comes with a few useful accessories: a belt and carrying pouch, a wrist strap with focusing and flash information on a tag and a clip-on direct vision viewfinder for use underwater when a face mask might otherwise get in the way.

This camera is ideal for those with a liking for water sports.
