Of all the auto focus systems available the infra-red method adopted by Canon has often been claimed as the best - and not only by Canon. Add to this a built-in electronic flash, powered film advance and re-winding and this camera just about does it all.

In the centre of the brightline viewfinder is a marked area where the auto focus infra-red rays ‘read’ the subject. For those wanting to bring creativity to their shots and have the area of best focus away from the centre of the shot there is a memory control which allows for this. The shot is framed with the area that is required sharp covered by the central focusing oval in the finder. The self timer lever on the front is then pressed down and the first pressure given to the shutter release, the subject re-composed and the shot taken.

Unlike other systems of auto focus which depend on the contrast of the subject, the Canon method uses an infra-red ray so can be used in pitch darkness with the same accuracy as if it were a brightly sunlit midday.

The auto winding mechanism operates at a maximum rate of a single frame a second - admittedly not fast enough to freeze the whole action of a crashing racing car - but quite sufficient for everyday needs. On the back of the top plate is a red striped signal that confirms the film is advancing through the camera. In addition a flashing red LED confirms that all is well.

When the roll of film is completed a conventional re-wind button on the baseplate is pressed and a switch on the top pressed against a spring - then the motor takes over and hauls the film back into its cassette.

Exposure is also fully automated. This is controlled by a Silicon cell below the lens - the whole system is
fully programmed so no control is possible, although a form of override can be introduced by altering the film speed setting. Doubling the rating of the film will give a stop less exposure, halving it would give a stop more and so on. The range of film speeds available runs from 25 to 400ASA and is shown in a small window above the lens.

The electronic flash is turned on by sliding a switch on the front of the body - when it is fully charged and ready to fire an orange lamp glows beside the eyepiece. Control is interlinked between the focusing and the aperture the camera has selected. The guide number is 45 (in feet with 100ASA film) and will operate in a range between 3 and 16ft. The flash is turned off by pushing it down into its ‘parked’ position.

Power is given by a pair of ‘AA’ size batteries -without them nothing will work - these slide into the base of the camera. Close to the battery cells is a tripod bush.

In the viewfinder is a brightline frame outlining the limits of the area that will be recorded on film, there are also parallax correction marks for close-up photography. Below the frame are a series of zone focusing symbols: figures, groups and mountains, which serve as an indication of the appropriate focusing distance.

The one thing missing from this camera is any form of remote release - which would extend the use of the camera considerably.

Apart from this one minor criticism, the Canon AF35M is an excellent camera. As a spare camera for an SLR owner or as the sole camera of the photographer who does not want the sophistication of interchangeable lenses and accessories, this camera is hard to beat.
