High class precision miniature of special versatility with ultra fast lens, coupled exposure meter, and exceptional range of interchangeable lenses as well as special accessories. Introduced in I960.

Lens of very good to high overall performance with critical definition, colour correction, flatness of field, and resolution. Shutter accurate within close limits of the engraved speeds. Quality workmanship of great precision.

screw thread as well as a bayonet mount. The screw thread is used for the majority of the Canon screw-mounted lenses. The bayonet mount takes the ultra speed 50 mm. /'0.9 lens and also the reflex housing for use with the longer tele lenses.

The ultra speed lens regarded as standard for the Canon 7 is over four times as fast as the usual standard f2 lens on miniature cameras. This extreme speed does however call for a rather large and bulky lens, with a big front diameter which tends to increase the risk of flare. The lens consists of seven elements combined in five components, and is based on a fairly conventional symmetrical design.

Other standard lenses available for the Canon 7 range from f 1.2 to f 1.8 in maximum aperture. The fastest lens in other focal lengths is a 35 mm. /1.5 wide angle unit.

The shutter is a focal plane design using stainless steel blinds. It runs horizontally across the film aperture. It is synchronized for focal plane flash bulbs at all shutter speeds (and smaller bulbs at the slower speeds) as well as for electronic flash. The latter is used with the shutter speed dial set to X, corresponding to an exposure time of about 1/30 second.

The shutter release button next to the speed dial incorporates a cable release socket. A ring surrounding the button serves both as a reversing clutch and as a safety lock. Turning the ring away from its normal (A) position to a red dot locks the release button. Turning on to the R position disengages the transport sprocket from the winding mechanism for rewinding.

A self-timer on the front of the camera gives an adjustable delay up to about 10 seconds.

The flash socket is mounted on the side of the camera, and is surrounded by a special bayonet ring to hold a suitably designed light-weight flash gun. The latter is thus directly connected
to the camera without the need for any flash cable or other external connection. The socket does however also take standard co-axial flash plugs from electronic flash units or other flash guns.

The bayonet ring also serves to fix an accessory shoe (on top of the camera) for use with special finders or with clip-on flash guns.

A rapid winding lever in the camera top advances the film and the film counter (in the window next to it), and also tensions the shutter. The film counter automatically returns to its starting position when the camera back is opened.

For rewinding, the crank built into the rewind knob is used. This also pulls out in the normal way to disengage the film cassette during loading and unloading.

The camera takes, in addition to standard 35 mm. cassettes, also special self-opening cassettes.