The reaction of most photographers on first sight of the A-1 is pure bafflement. Yet once the controls are mastered this is one of the most pleasant cameras to operate. If offers just about every exposure control system that any photographer could ever want to use.

Most experienced camera users can pick up any model, play around with it for a bit and start using it. With this camera a long session with the instruction book is called for. Every possible combination must be set and re-set until it becomes second nature.

That versatility is due to the fact that metering can be done manually or in one of the five auto exposure modes. These consist of aperture priority, shutter speed priority, stop-down aperture priority, fully programmed and automatic flash. The micro-chip used has Pure-Integrated Injection Logic to reduce battery drain from the 6v silver oxide cell.

The LED viewfinder provides information of everything that is going on in the complex metering system. This can all be switched on by first pressure on the shutter release, by pressing the exposure preview switch on the left side of the lens mounting or by pressing the memory lock just above the preview switch.

Around the shutter release button is the automatic exposure (AE) selector - this places the camera in the mode to be used. For aperture priority automation AV (aperture value) is selected. Unlike aperture priority cameras the aperture to be used is not set on the lens barrel but in a window to the forward and left of the AE selector. These are set by a thumb-wheel for any value between f/1.2 and f/22 - the lens is set to the A setting and the information relayed from body to lens and the correct shutter speed given steplessly.

Turn the selector to TV (time value) and you are in the shutter speed priority mode. The range of shutter speeds is then displayed in the same window as are the apertures when in that mode. One is chosen and the correct aperture delivered.

For stop-down aperture priority metering the lens is turned to an aperture setting and the stop-down lever locked in. The programmed model gives no control over aperture or shutter speed - the combination is selected by the camera. To select this mode the AE selector is turned to TV. The shutter speed/aperture (AT) dial turned to the setting P, in a green box and the lens set at A.
Although there is no control over shutter speed or aperture in this mode both are shown in the viewfinder. In the event of potential over or under exposure both sets of LEDs will flash.

The last automatic mode is for flash. This must be used with either one of the Canon dedicated Speed-lites or one of the independent range of guns.

The left hand end of the top plate carries the film selector dial marked in ASA only. This runs between 6 and 12800 - a really useful and comprehensive range. On the other side of this dial is the exposure override compensation setting. This allows + or - one or two stops variation to exposure.

At the other end of the top plate and behind the AE selector is the frame number signal. The wind-on lever has a short and positive throw to it with a handy 30° stand-off angle. Around this is the main on/off and self timer switch. The L position is for locked - the shutter cannot be fired and all metering systems are off, A turns the power on, in addition there are two other settings 2 and 10 which give either two or 10 seconds delay of exposure indicated by a flashing LED.

Behind this and below the wind-on lever is the multiple exposure switch.

The front of the body is fairly complex also. At the top right side is the thumb-wheel to change the AE selector. Below this is the battery housing which forms a hand-grip that is both useful and comfortable.

There are three controls on the left hand side of the lens mounting. From top to bottom these are the exposure hold button, when this is depressed an extra 11/2 stops exposure will be delivered, either the camera is in shutter speed or aperture priority mode. But it must be depressed during exposure.

The button below this is the exposure preview switch which activates the metering system and the viewfinder LEDs. Both these switches are on the lens mounting. Slightly nearer to the body’s edge and below is the stop-down metering switch, when locked this gives metering and viewing at the working aperture.

This is a complex camera. Many of the controls are either in unexpected places, have unfamiliar signs or do several jobs. To get the most from it there must be complete familiarity with all operating functions. Otherwise this is a fine camera which ranks among the leaders.
