The Canon AE-1 could be said to have been solely responsible for the current boom in camera sales. Any camera that has remained a firm favourite for nearly six years must be a camera of considerable quality and this camera is undeniably that.

Basically it is a shutter speed priority automatic with manual override and high quality feel and optics. When it was first introduced it broke new price barriers and now costs less than it did formerly so is a terrific buy.

Rather than being an ultra-compact lightweight this can best be described as a middle-of-the-road model with a solid and reliable feel. The heart of the whole system is the Silicon chip which has the power of a mini computer. This camera was the first to use this system which reduced the number of moving parts and consequently the cost of manufacture and the price.

The top plate is straightforward. The re-wind knob is where you would expect to find it, on the left hand side of the pentaprism housing.

The hot-shoe has two additional contacts for the Canon dedicated range of flashes or Speedlites.

The shutter release is electro-magnetic and has a threaded insert for the use of a cable release. Around this is a three position switch. Forward is the self timer, this is set and the shutter release pressed for action, it is electronic and runs for a set 10 seconds which is indicated by a flashing LED. The middle position is for all systems go and a first pressure on the shutter release will activate the metering. The position to the rear locks the shutter and is useful when carrying the camera in a bag.

Behind this is the frame counter which is.additive and self-zeroing when the back is opened.

Lastly, working to the right, is the wind-on lever which centres on the shutter speed selector and film speed dial.

The speeds run from 2-1/1 OOOsec plus B, these can be set quite easily with the pad of the index finger while the tip hovers over the shutter release button.

The edge of this dial is serrated and is lifted to alter the film speed setting between its limits of 25 and 3200ASA.

As with later models in the Canon A series the 6v
battery is in a compartment on the front right hand side of the body. The cover of this compartment forms a snug hand-grip.

On the left side of the lens mounting is the auto compensation button, this gives an additional 1V2 stops exposure, for backlit subjects, but by slowing down the shutter rather than by opening the diaphragm.

Below this is the stop-down button for previewing depth of field or stop-down metering. On the top of this side is the P/C synch terminal for use of off-camera flash units.

The lens is the excellent Canon f/1.8 50mm of which there must be over five million in circulation.

Beyond the minimum aperture of f/22 is one additional position marked A, for automatic. This is used when the camera is operated on the automatic setting. The shutter speed required is set on the selector dial and at the moment of exposure the lens stops down to the aperture which will deliver correct exposure.

On the right side of the viewfinder screen is marked an aperture scale from f/1.2 to f/22 - the aperture which is to be used for the chosen shutter speed is indicated by a pointing needle. The area above f/16 is marked in red to warn of possible over exposure, depending on the minimum aperture of the lens in use.

At the bottom of the scale a flashing LED will warn of under exposure. If the camera is set to manual - by means of selecting an aperture on the lens barrel as well as a shutter speed, an M flashes above the viewfinder aperture scale. The matt screen is fairly standard with a centre spot split image surrounded by a microprism collar. The screen can be changed - but only by a Canon service centre.

With its wide range of accessories and lenses this is a formidable camera. Certainly there has never been a more popular high quality camera available and with the speed that new models are being introduced these days it seems doubtful that we will see its like again.

Canon have introduced a slightly modified model in the form of the AE-1 Program, this has one extra exposure mode and one or two other improvements but the basic design of the camera has remained the same. You might buy different but you would be hard pressed to buy better.
