For all-round rugged reliability the Canon F-1 has led the field for the past ten years or so. Then last year Canon gave us a new model with all the mechanical solidity of its predecessor and a few tricks of its own.

Although this is a manual camera it can, by the addition of a few simple accessories, become an aperture priority or a shutter priority automatic or both and can by changing the screen, be used for spot metering. Added to this it is solidly built, has a full range of mechanical speeds which will carry on working without a battery and is sealed against moisture and dust.

This is certainly a quality camera - but it is made and designed with the professional user only in mind. It will appeal to amateur users but they should think very carefully before buying one.

As would be expected with a camera like this the pentaprism is changeable. This is done by pressing a button on each side of the prism. Besides the standard there are four other models that can be fitted. Of the five, three can be used for eyelevel work and are fitted with hot-shoes with additional contacts for dedicated flash work, and two are for waist or low level work.

The one that will appeal to most users is the AE Finder FN which allows aperture priority exposure automation as well as manual metering. This is achieved by simply turning the shutter speed dial to its A setting. This also gives full viewfinder information with a shutter speed scale shown along the bottom of the screen and the aperture in use reflected to the right of the image area by a ‘Judas Window’.

Below the prism is the screen. There are three types available; those for giving a centre-weighted average meter reading (taking a reading from the whole frame
area but taking most account of the centre, which is usually the important area), a central area metering (reading from the central area only) and centre spot reading (this reads from the very centre of the frame only and must be used with great care).

To give shutter speed priority automation either the autowinder or motor drive must be fitted. The lens aperture ring is then turned to the auto-position and a shutter speed selected. Selection of this changes the viewfinder read-out from a shutter speed to the right of the screen to a shutter speed scale below it.

The basic camera is manual metering though, its tough rugged metal design will appeal to professional photographers, as will the ability to use just about every metering method known - with the addition of an accessory.	v

In addition to the metering options the camera offers a stop-down button, a re-wind button on the top plate as well as the base, exposure compensation of up to two stops in either direction, multiple exposure device, an electronic 12 second delayed action self timer and the facility for dedicated flash.

There is a full range of accessories available which make this camera a strong contender for the title of the most professional system available. The autowinder offers up to two frames per second advancing and has the unusual, though not unique, ability to re-wind the film into the cassette.

The old style F-1 proved itself to be a real professional work horse over a full decade - it seems likely that the new model will add to the reputation that this excellent camera has given to the title F-1.
