Canon EOS IX Lite

If you think that the “Lite” in this camera’s name implies fewer features, you’d be making a mistake. In the EOS IX Lite’s case, it seems to be more objective — this camera is substantially lighter than the EOS IX, weighing just 12.7 ounces (356 grams). For example, instead of the stainless steel cladding found on the IX, the Lite sports a polycarbonate resin exterior with the brushed stainless steel look. In terms of features, however, the IX Lite holds its own quite well, regardless of which camera it is compared to.

Like the IX, the IX Lite will accept any of the more than 50 EOS lenses. It also offers the other APS features found in the EOS IX, such as Print Quality Improvement (PQI) and Information Exchange (IX) technology (see the opening APS remarks). But it also has several features that are lacking - or less refined - on the IX. For example, the IX Lite has a locking film chamber, reducing the chance of accidentally fogged film. The Lite’s viewfinder displays opaque masks, depending on the image format selected, thus cropping the viewfinder image accurately, whereas the IX displays translucent masks that may not be visible in subdued lighting.
There are additional improvements, which include a Print Quantity setting (see the opening APS remarks) and the ability to select from over 100 titles in 12 languages to be imprinted on the back of the photograph. The IX Lite also features mid-roll rewind capability, the Fixed Time Printing Mode (FTPM), which gives the photographer creative control over the developing process, Autofocus modes include One-Shot AF and AI Servo AF. The heart of the AF system is a widely spaced, three-sensor array. The camera will select the best one under normal shooting modes, but the user has the ability to select a particular sensor if desired.
Exposure and metering: The EOS IX Lite incorporates a six-zone evaluative metering system, in which three of the six zones are linked to the three autofocus sensors. This type of exposure metering, where the active metering zones are linked to the AF sensors, greatly improves the chance of obtaining accurately exposed photographs. Centerweighted averaging is also available when shooting in the manual exposure mode. The IX Lite also provides partial metering with AE lock, where the central 6.5% of the viewfinder screen is the active area.

Most of the IX Lite’s settings can be selected via the Command Dial located
on the camera’s back - a very effective control feature that has become an EOS hallmark. Exposure modes available with a turn of the dial include Full Auto, aperture- and shutter-priority AE, program AE with shift, manual, and depth-of-field AE. Preset program modes available include Close-up, Landscape, Night Scene, and Portrait. The built-in TTL flash is adequate for general snapshot photography, and will cover focal length ranges down to 22mm (intended, no doubt, to work with the EOS 22-55mm zoom designed especially for EOS IX cameras).
