Canon ELPH 490Z

Billed as “the world’s smallest 4x zoom camera” during its release, the ELPH 490Z is packed with features that belie its small size. The ultra-compact 22.5mm-90mm f/5.6-8.9 lens uses a 7-group, 7-element all-glass optical formula, including two aspherical elements for a high degree of aberration control and sharpness. The real-image viewfinder is coupled to the lens, so that as the lens zooms, so will the viewfinder. Parallax correction is built into the viewfinder as well, assuring that the image one sees
will be the precise image recorded on film.

Because of the leaderless design of the APS film cassette, all APS cameras feature improved ease of film loading. Given this fact, discussions of how easily the film is loaded into an APS camera may appear to be somewhat redundant at first blush. However, the ELPH 490Z takes these matters of ease to a somewhat higher plane - high enough, in my view, to justify a few brief comments. To load film in the ELPH 490Z, one must know how to do two things: push a button, and drop an unused film cassette into its receptacle. The 490Z will do the rest. It actually detects when a roll has been loaded, grabs it, draws it into the camera, closes the door, and advances the film to the first frame.

The autofocus system in the ELPH 490Z is suprisingly sophisticated for a camera of this type. It incorporates the same hybrid active/passive technology' found in the standard ELPH, but the number of AF sensors has been increased from three to five.

Unique (at present) to the ELPH 490Z is Canon’s “Best Shot” dial. This feature, highly reminiscent of the PIC settings found on several EOS models, offers six different shooting modes, each represented by its own icon on the dial: Action, Night Photography, Portraits, Close-Ups, Spotlight, and Full-Automatic.

Borrowing a page from the book of another Canon design experiment known as the Photura - a device that looked more like a miniature, hand-held rocket launcher than a camera - the lens cover serves double duty on the ELPH 490Z. When in the up-flipped position, it exposes the unit’s five-mode multi-fiinction flash. At least on the 490Z it looks like a flash. On the Photura, it looked like an aiming reticle. For all the unusual nature of its design, however, the flash unit on the 490Z can handle a
variety of situations. Labeled by Canon as a “5-mode, multi-function flash unit,” the five modes consist of auto with redeye reduction, auto without red-eye reduction, ON, OFF, and slow sync. Neglecting for the moment Canon’s apparent argument that an ON-OFF switch is equivalent to two operating modes, it is more useful to think of the ELPH 490Z as having “slow-sync” capability (see the previous comments on the ELPH for an explanation), plus the ability to disable the flash’s red-eye reduction. In this respect, the 490Z’s flash is identical in capabilities to that found on the original ELPH. One interesting point worth noting is the fact that the distance between the lens and the flash on the ELPH 490Z is greater than that of any other Canon camera with a built-in flash. This characteristic alone should help to reduce the occurrence of red eye in many, if not most, instances.

Other features found on the ELPH 490Z include a variable-diopter eyepiece, triple-zone metering with automatic and manual exposure compensation of up to ±1.5 stops, and a remote control receiver to be used in conjunction with the optional remote controller RC-5 for those times when the photographer feels like being in front of the camera instead of behind it.
