EOS-1

Canon’s first autofocus flagship, the EOS-1, was obviously designed to go toe-to-toe with the only other autofocus heavyweight on the block at the time of its introduction, Nikon’s F4. Despite the F4’s popularity among the professional community, many have deserted the Nikon ranks and switched to the EOS-1. Such a pivotal (and costly) move is justi-
fied by those who have made the switch for a couple of reasons. Perhaps the most significant reason is that the EOS-1 outperforms the F-4 in terms of sheer auto-focusing speed. In the super-competitive world of photojournalism, even the slightest edge in performance can be the difference between an award-winning photograph and an honorable mention. Secondly, as sophisticated as the EOS-1 is, ultimately it is only as good as its lenses. Canon’s high-performance, ultra-expensive L-series EF lenses have been consistently rated as top performers, and are establishing a reputation among photo professionals as some of the finest 35mm SLR lenses ever made.
The EOS-l’s autofocus modes include one-shot (focus priority) or continuous (servo) with “Focus Prediction” at speeds up to 4.5 fps with the optional power drive booster (up to 2.5 fps with the standard built-in drive). The EOS-l’s “cross-type” AF sensors detect both horizontally-lined or (with f/2.8 and faster lenses) vertically-lined subjects.

Shutter speeds range from 30 seconds to 1 /8000, plus B (which includes an elapsed time indicator). Flash sync occurs at 1/250. DX film coding is there, but so is the option to override it. Metering options include six-zone evaluative, centerweighted, partial (5.8%), or spot (2.3%). Exposure modes include program (w/shift), aperture and shutter priority, depth-of-field program and, of
course, metered manual. Other exposure features are exposure compensation, AE lock and auto-bracketing. With the Canon 420 EZ, 430 EZ, or later flash units, TTL flash, auto fill-flash, adjustable fill ratios, second-curtain sync, multi-strobe effects and variable power levels are all at your fingertips. The most innovative feature of the EOS-1 is the Quick-Control Dial (aka thumbwheel) on the back, which the user can choose to select either shutter speeds or apertures. In addition, the EOS-1 has eight user-set custom functions for AF control, AE control, meter patterns, film advance and DX coding. And a first for Canon SLRs: the EOS-1 has a viewfinder that displays 100% of the actual image, a basic requirement for critical copy work or exact framing.

Some other features are built-in diopter correction, multi-exposure, a self timer, and auto film loading and rewind with mid-roll rewind. The optional Power Drive Booster advances film at speeds up to 5.5 fps.