EOS-ln

If you feel the temptation to believe the “n” in the EOS-In’s name stands for “minor update,” you’d be dead wrong. When introduced, the EOS-ln was an entirely new camera that just happened to share some of the same subcomponents as the original.

The EOS-In’s AF system was tweaked to render even faster performance, especially with moving subjects. It also benefits from the same 5-sensor AF technology that is found in the A2, although the central sensor is more similar to the original EOS-l’s than the one used in the A2. The like the A2, does not have the Eye Controlled Focus System found on the A2E. Why not? The spin was that Canon was still working on an ECF system that would work reliably when the camera is held either horizontally or vertically. It would appear that, as far back as the A2’s introduction, Canon was already preparing a cushion for the letdown many users would feel when the EOS-In would be released without ECF, by referring to the A2 as the camera designed with the professional in mind. (Translation: get used to the A2 and you won’t be as angry at us when the EOS-In is released with no ECF.) Despite this omission, however, this is an impressive update, and still worth a look.

The EOS-In’s metering system has five different patterns from which to choose: 16-zone evaluative (similar to that found on the A2 and A2E), a 3.5% spot pattern that is coupled to the active AF sensor, 9% spot, 2.3% spot, and centerweighted. Flash exposure is measured by employing a 3-zone selective system linked to the active AE sensor for improved flash and fill Hash performance.

The EOS-In’s range of user-selectable custom functions has increased from six to fourteen. Included in the list of options are such choice selections as mirror lock-up, AF sensor selection with the quick-control dial, adjustment of shutter speed and aperture increment sizes, various auto bracketing adjustments, and more. The camera has a redesigned film rewind system that manages to be whisper quiet without forsaking the ruggedness of a gear drive. When using the updated Power Drive Booster (interchangeable with the original one), the maximum film advance speed was edged up to a full 6 fps.

