Canon EOS 3

Ever since Canon released the Elan HE, with its much improved version of Canon’s Eye Controlled Focus system, first introduced on the A2E, and especially since Nikon’s release of its remarkable new flagship camera, the F5, Canon watchers have been speculating over the
company’s next high-end entry. Which camera will it replace, the A2E or the EOS-In? Well, as it turns out, the answer is neither. Both the EOS-In and the A2E remain current models, with the EOS 3 wedged securely between them. However, at this point in time, the just-announced EOS 3’s street price seems to be much more closely situated to the EOS-In’s than to the A2E’s. Regardless of pricing, though, the EOS 3 is definitely not some sort of downscaled EOS-ln - or upscaled A2E, for that matter. In terms of autofocusing performance, the EOS 3 is now Canon’s top performer. In terms of market niche, the EOS 3 is intended and built for the demands of the professional. It is, in anyone’s terms, an altogether new camera, incorporating a number of improvements not found on any other EOS. Most significant of all, though, the EOS 3 departs from all other AF cameras with an astounding array of 45 autofocus sensors, providing the user with a dazzling viewfinder presentation as the group of active AF sensors light up in response to one's eye placement, thanks to Canon’s Eye Controlled Focus technology. The 45-sensor array is located within a 15mm by 8mm oval, and is linked to a 21-sensor array of exposure sensors for optimum exposure accuracy.

An obvious question is, since conventional Charge-Coupled Device (CCD) AF sensors are expensive to produce, how was Canon able to incorporate a 4 5-AF- sensor array, while keeping the EOS 3’s price down to a “pro/am” price point? The answer, as it turns out, lies in the technology of the sensors themselves. All current autofocus SLRs, except the EOS 3, rely on (CCD) technology to accomplish their autofocusing chores. For the EOS 3, Canon opted to use CMOS sensors (Complementary Metal Oxide Semiconductors) instead. CMOS sensors have been around for quite a while and are relatively easy and
cheap to produce, thus a lot of CMOS sensors can be packed into the design for the same price as a few CCDs, resulting in an overall superior and more sensitive AF system. In fact, while most AF cameras require a maximum aperture of f/5.6 or greater, the EOS 3 is capable of focusing with an f/8 maximum aperture.

Let’s take a look at the some of the other capabilities of this feature-packed camera. Despite its large AF array, the AF system is relatively straightforward, with two available autofocusing modes: One-Shot AF and Predictive AF with AI Servo AF. The former enables AF lock, in which the shutter will not fire until the subject is in focus. The latter allows the shutter to be tripped at any time and uses predictive focus technology to render infocus images. Three methods of selecting focusing points are possible: automatic selection, manual selection, and Eye Controlled Focus selection.

The latest generation of Canon’s Eye Controlled Focus technology, as found on the EOS 3, is now called High Speed Eye Controlled Focus, presumably because it must function properly in conjunction with the EOS 3’s improved focusing speed. Speaking of which, with the optional Power Drive Booster PB-E2, the camera is capable of delivering up to 7 frames per second in Predictive AF mode. Without the PB-E2, the cameras’s maximum continuous speed is 4.3 frames per second.

The EOS 3 benefits as well from a selection of metering modes. It’s likely, that the camera will be used the most in its 21-zone evaluative metering mode, where the zone or zones linked to the active AF sensors will measure exposure information. But for those of us die-hards that still prefer partial metering, it’s there too (approximately the central 8.5% of the viewfinder area). Spot metering, with the sensor locked to the active focusing point (about 2.4%) is available, as is multi-spot metering, where up to 8 readings can be stored and averaged. And the camera retains that archaic standard, good old centerweighted averaging.

Exposure modes consist of Program AE with shift, shutter- and aperture-priority AE, Depth-of-field AE, E-TTL program flash AE with the 550 EX, A-TTL program flash AE, TTL program flash AE, manual, and bulb. ISO speed ranges from 6 to 6400. Exposure compensation is available using auto exposure bracketing (AEB), which is a 3-shot group consisting of standard, over, and under exposures, and which can span a range of ±3 stops in 1/3 stop increments. Manual exposure compensation is available via the Quick Control Dial, or the exposure compensation button and the main dial. Plus AEB and manual exposure compensation can be used together. AE lock and fall manual exposure control are available, as is multiple exposure capability. When the 550EX Speedlite is attached, flash exposure bracketing is possible, as well.

Shutter speeds range from 30 seconds to 1/8000 second, plus B, and are adjustable in 1/3-stop increments. Flash sync occurs at 1/200 second. The EOS 3 has 18 custom functions, which include such niceties as choosing to leave the film leader in or out, AEB sequencing, mirror lock-up, first or second-curtain flash sync, and a bunch more. The self-timer has a 2-second and a 10-second setting. An optional programmable remote release is also available, as is a programmable data back DB-E2. The EOS 3 takes the same focusing screens as the EOS-In, automatically superimposing its 45-sensor array on the new screens.

