With five models in the A range, Canon seem to have come up with every possible exposure metering combination. As well as being the simplest in the range, the AV-1 is the smallest - but only by the merest touch. The top plate of this camera is straightforward. The re-wind crank is surrounded by the film speed selector - ASA only and running from 25 to 1600. Beside this is the battery check, you would soon know if the battery was dead as there would be no action.

The conventionally placed hot-shoe has one additional contact for the use of the Canon range of Speedlites. This is the only means of firing a flash as there is no P/C socket.

There are five positions on the mode selector dial which can be turned through a full circle. These are: A for automatic operation, B for brief time exposure, a lightning symbol beside a 60 which sets the shutter to the flash synching speed of 1/60sec, and a choice of two delayed action or self timer positions.

The delay is for an electronically measured 10 seconds and this is shown by a flashing light on the front edge of the body. The flashing speeds up during the last two seconds of the run down so the subjects know when to get into position. The choice here is for delayed action using flash or with automatic exposure.

The wind-on lever has a handy stand-off angle and is plastic covered at the end. In front of this is the frame counter which is additive and self zeroing when the camera back is opened.
First pressure on the large, light cable release threaded shutter release switches on the metering system. This relies on a Silicon cell for its readings.

The viewfinder read-out is by a swinging needle against the appropriate speed - although it works steplessly. There are under and over exposure warnings and the range of shutter speeds is from 2 to 1 /10OOsec with the shutter a cloth horizontal run type.

There is an exposure compensation control of sorts. This will give an additional 11/2 stops exposure and is located on the side of the lens housing. Further control is possible by altering the film speed setting.

The standard lens is that good Canon optic the 50mm f/1.8 which gives excellent results throughout its range. This will focus down to 11/2ft (0.45m) and has click stops at each full and ha'f aperture.

Power, as with other A series cameras is provided by a 6v silver oxide cell. This is a healthy supply but expensive to replace. The housing for the battery is on the front right of the body and forms a good hand-grip. A spare can be carried in the case supplied which fits on the carrying strap.

This is a pleasant camera to use and will prove ideal for the first time SLR buyer. As a second or spare body for the photographer already lucky enough to own a Canon this could be just the thing in which to carry a second lens or alternate film. All lenses will match up with the extensive range offered by Canon and it will accept the two frames per second winder.
