In the ultra-competitive autofocus SLR market, either a camera maker constantly pushes the limits of the envelope, or it quickly becomes an also-ran. Canon is obviously determined not to let this happen with its EOS line, and the A2E convincingly reinforces this point.

With Canon’s Eye Controlled Focus, it is possible to look at a subject within the viewfinder and havie the camera focus on it automatically. Instead of having one, two, or even three autofocus sensors, the A2E has five, any of which can be triggered just by looking at it. Canon has applied its experience in the design of optometric instruments to the world of autofocus camera technology, with its Eye Controlled Focus system being the fruits of its labors. How does it work? Putting it simply, the camera analyzes a ghost image reflected from the eye’s cornea via four infrared diodes located around the viewfinder and a CCD (charge coupled device) located next to the pentaprism. This system also tracks the eyeball as it moves, which is what enables it to determine which sensor the eye is looking at. In order for the Eye Controlled Focus System to work at all, however, the camera must be calibrated to each user’s eye (a total of five calibrations can be stored). Fortunately, the calibration process is easy to do and takes only seconds to complete. This can be very handy if more than one person uses the camera, or if one wears glasses and/or contacts.
Canon has attempted to market the A2E to advanced amateurs, claiming that professionals will prefer the A2 with its more straightforward approach and lack of the Eye Controlled Focus System. Based on what I’ve observed, though, I’d say Canon’s spin hasn’t worked. A professional will use every tool at his or her disposal to get that one unique, timeless shot that will separate them from the rest of the pack. In a previous edition, I predicted there would be a strong demand for the A2E among professional EOS users. With the release of the pro-level EOS 3 and its third-generation Eye Controlled Focus technology, my prediction seems to have been on track.
Canon didn’t limit this eye-point concept in the A2E just to the autofocus sensors, however. Another, smaller rectangle is visible in the top left corner of the viewfinder. By glancing there, the lens will stop down to taking aperture to allow a momentary preview of depth of field. This is a dazzling concept, and strikes one as being not so much a depth-of-field preview only, but a preview of things to come. One can only speculate as to what sort of tantalizing offshoots will be incorporated into later cameras based on this technology -control of autoexposure modes, exposure compensation, or metering patterns, for example.

Both cameras use the aforementioned 5-segment autofocus sensor array (the A2 works like an updated 10s in this respect), but coupled with this expanded capability is a 16-segment evaluative metering pattern. Both cameras also have a high-speed integral motor drive, capable of burning through a roll of film at the rate of five frames per second. The motor drive uses a belt transport similar to the Elan’s, but has a quiet rewind mode claimed by Canon to be 2l/i times quieter. It also has a higher speed rewind mode which is slightly louder, but which is twice as fast (9 seconds for a 36-expo-sure roll versus 18 seconds).

With the exception of the features outlined previously, the A2 and A2E’s autofocus systems closely resemble those of other contemporary EOS cameras, which include autoswitching from single-shot AF to AI Servo when subject movement is detected, and predictive autofocus. The central autofocus sensor is cross-based, which will enable the camera to focus easily on both horizontal and vertical lines.

Exposure modes include what has become a standard array of selections on EOS cameras: program, full-auto, portrait, landscape, close-up, sports, aperture- and shutter-priority, depth-of-field, and metered manual. Both the A2 and A2E have the thumbwheel found on the EOS-1 and Elan, located on the camera back. The wheel can be used to alter either aperture or shutter speed selections, depending on the user’s preference. Other available exposure modes
include autobracketing, ±2 EV exposure compensation, multi-exposures, TTL-flash with the built-in flash (GN 43 @ 28mm) and accessory units such as the 430 EZ, second-curtain flash sync, and red-eye reduction with the built-in flash.

Shutter speeds range from 30 seconds to 1/8000 second, plus B, with X sync occurring at 1/200. Some of the many other features include 16 user-set custom functions, a 3% spot metering pattern which can be shifted between five different areas (set by one of the user-set functions), interchangeable focusing screens, a threaded manual flash PC socket, a T3 remote switch socket, a two-position self-timer, mirror lock-up (set by one of the user-set functions), a built-in focus aid light, and with the A2, built-in eyepiece dioptric correction. Add the optional accessory grip VG10 to either camera and you have the main input dial, shutter release, manual-focusing point-selection button and AE lock button located conveniently for vertical operation - a worthwhile addition any serious photographer will consider indispensible.

