EOS Elan II and HE

The Elan II and HE differ in one primary area: die Elan HE has Canon’s unique Eye-Level Focus tehnology, originally introduced with the A2E, although it has been vasdy improved over the first generation system found on the A2E. Because of this singular difference, the description for the II applies to the IIE as well.

While the Elan II shares the same name and many of its features with the original Elan, it doesn’t share much in
the way of looks. The Elan II is clad in an aluminum top cover and sports prominent top dials, the resulting combination giving it that retro look that has become so popular of late. A number of new features and improvements have been added to accompany the facelift, as well, so let’s take a look.

The single item that set the original Elan apart from other cameras, regardless of make or model was its belt-driven Whisper Drive motor drive system. On the Elan II, the Whisper Drive has two available rewind modes: silent and high speed. The silent mode will rewind a 24-exposure roll in 12 seconds, whereas in high-speed mode, the same roll of film will rewind in only 6 seconds.

The Elan II’s three-point autofocus-ing system retains the One-Shot AF and AI Servo modes found on the original, plus it has an additional mode called AI Focus that works as a combination of the two. In AI Focus mode, the camera starts out in One-Shot AF mode, but once movement is sensed, it will automatically shift to AI Servo mode. While in AI Servo mode, the Elan II can track moving subjects at the rate of 2.5 frames per second, using the built-in motor drive, as they move from one focusing point to another. All three modes are accessed via the raised dial atop the right side of the camera body. Designed into the Elan IPs AF system is Canon’s exclusive Advanced Integrated Multi-Point Control (AIM) system. AIM links the camera’s 3-point autofocus system to its multi-zone metering system for available light and flash photography, thereby rendering sharp, correctly exposed photographs, no matter where the main subject is within the image area.

The same five exposure modes and four PIC modes found on the Elan are also available on the Elan II, and are accessed by the raised “Command Dial” on the top left of the camera body. On the Elan IIE, the Eye-Control calibra-
tion mode is also located here. Shutter speeds remain unchanged, as do the three metering modes, although the partial mode is now 9.5% of the image area.

The non-zooming built-in flash (GN 43 @ ISO 100) covers focal lengths down to 28mm. When combined with the Speedlite 220EX or 380EX, Canon’s Evaluative TTL (E-TTL) flash system is available. E-TTL takes advantage of the above-mentioned AIM system, whereby ambient light levels, subject position, and pre-flash data are analyzed, resulting in a natural balance between subject and background. Other flash automation features available when the II and HE are used in conjunction with the 380EX include FE Lock (Flash Exposure Lock), which provides an AE lock fucntion for flash photography, and FP Mode (FP = Focal Plane), a setting on the flash that enables it to sync at all speeds (up to 1/4000 sec.) with the Elan II.

The number of custom functions has been expanded from seven to eleven on the Elan II, while the bar-code reader has been dropped. A built-in wireless remote control has also been added. The II will accept the accessory BP-50 battery pack, which not only replaces the lithium battery with much more common AA-size batteries, but which also has an additional ON/OFF switch and a shutter release positioned for vertical shooting. All other features of die original Elan are applicable to the II as well.

The Elan HE is also the beneficiary of an updated Eye Controlled Focusing system, first available on the A2E. The focusing response time has been much improved, plus it operates in both the horizontal and vertical positions. Additionally, the IIE’s Eye Controlled Focus system is linked directly to the camera’s Servo AF mode and Depth-of-Field indicator, and operates in concert with the AIM system. Calibration of the Eye Controlled Focus system is much simpler with the Elan HE as well. The user sets the Command Dial (that’s the one on the photographer’s left) to the CAL setting, and looks at the flashing focusing point in the viewfinder while depressing the shutter release halfway. The user repeats this operation for all three focusing points. Up to three separate user settings can be stored.