EOS IX

In the development of the EOS IX, Canon engineers seem to have taken a few items from Column A, a few from Column B, thrown in a few others from Column IX, and fused them together to come up with a startlingly original design. Like its diminutive cousin, the ELPH, the EOS IX shares the same 1X240 film format, and is also clad in 316 stainless steel. For much of the way the IX operates, however, it more closely resembles an Elan II converted to APS . .. and a more expensive Elan II, at that. To be fair, though, much of the expense is due to the fact that the IX is currently available only with the EF 24-85mm f/3.5-4.5 lens (which can be used on 35mm EOS SLRs, incidentally).

The EOS IX supports the following APS features: Mid-Roll Change (MRC), Print Quality Improvement (PQI), Fixed Time Printing Method (FTPM), automatic recording and imprinting of exposure data on the back of each print, and date and time imprint options. It displays the selected image format, whether HDTV, “Classic,” or Panorama, by means of translucent LCD masks in the viewfinder. See the notes in the preceding APS section for explanations of these features.

The autofocus system on the IX exploits Canon’s latest generation Multi-BASIS (Based-Stored Image Sensor) technology, using the same three-zone autofocus system found on the EOS Elan II. The camera will automatically select which focusing sensor to use, although this can be overridden. Available AF modes are One-Shot AF, AI Servo and AI Focus. The latter mode is a combination of the first two: the camera starts off in the One-Shot AF mode, then if movement is detected, it switches to AI Servo. The AF system on the IX is part of a larger picture that Canon calls AIM (Advanced Integrated Multi-point control), in which the AF system is linked to the autoexposure and E-TTL flash systems, thereby providing greater accuracy and flexibility.

The IX’s metering system offers the same options that are found on the Elan II, as well. The user may choose between 6-zone evaluative metering, partial metering (a tight 6.5% of the image area, actually tighter than the Elan IPs 9.5%), and center-weighted averaging.

The exposure options found on the IX share some similarities to both the Elan II and the Rebel G. Available exposure modes include six “Image Zone” modes, similar (if not identical) to the
PIC modes found on many EOS models: Full Auto, Portrait, Landscape, Close-Up, Sports, and Night. Other exposure modes include Intelligent Program AE, shutter- and aperture-priority AE, metered manual, AE lock, auto exposure bracketing, a “Series Scene” feature, ±2 EV exposure compensation in fi-stop increments (available when any of the Creative Zone modes is selected), manual ISO setting override, and E-TTL flash automation.

The Series Scene feature is linked to the print specifications information that is shared between the camera and the photofinishing equipment, and works in concert with the IX’s AE bracketing and AE lock functions. When either of these modes is selected, the Series Scene feature intercedes during the print process, preventing the photofinishing equipment from correcting the intentional over- and under-exposures. This feature is similar to FTPM, but can be applied to individual frames instead of the whole roll.

The flash system found on the IX is remarkably advanced and comprehensive. Available when combined with the 220EX or 380EX, the E-TTL system of flash automation interfaces with the IX’s AIM system, providing total integration of autofocus, metering, and exposure for best results. The E-TTL system utilizes the IX’s 6-zone evaluative metering system to measure ambient light, subject position and pre-flash data, so as to provide a natural balance between subject and background. Another flash feature, called FE Lock (FE = Flash Exposure), works in conjunction with the IX’s partial metering mode, allowing pre-calcu-lated flash exposure information to be stored for up to sixteen seconds. This allows the photographer ample time to recompose or to make other system adjustments prior to taking the shot, all the while maintaining correct flash exposure information. High-speed flash sync,
which can be set at speeds from 1/180 to 1/4000 second, is available on the IX when using the Speedlite 220EX or 380EX set to “FP” (for Focal Plane) mode. The built-in flash (GN 36/11 [ft/m] at ISO 100) features red-eye reduction, provides regular TTL flash control, and covers focal lengths down to 22mm.

Other features found on the EOS IX include Canon’s “Whisper Drive” technology to reduce film wind and rewind noise; interface capabilities with either optional remote controls: the RC-1 Infrared Wireless Remote, or the RS-60E3 Wired Remote; and a self-timer.

