This Swedish camera has a phenomenally good reputation and is recognised by many photographers as being the best in the world. It is the ultimate system camera - whatever you want to do with it, the chances are that there is a lens or accessory to let you - at a price.

The camera has three main parts: the lens, the back and the body. Both the back and the lens can be changed. The lens would be changed for obvious reasons. But why change the back?

It could be to change the film size - as well as the basic back for 120 film giving 12 images of 21A ins (6 x 6cms) there are backs to give 24 exposures on 220 roll film, up to 200 exposures on 70mm film, a single sheet of 21/2 x 21/2ins film, 16 4.5 x 6cms images or a sheet of Polaroid instant film.

Two identical backs could also be used to hold different film stocks, so if a photographer wants to shoot the same subject in colour and black and white he can simply swop backs in mid roll and carry on shooting.

With each back a slide is provided to protect the film when the back is removed, this cannot be done without the slide in place and is just one of the many built-in Hasselblad safety features.

The viewfinder can also be changed. There is a metering prism finder available as well as those used for viewing from different angles which are equipped with a prism to correct the image and make it more in line with a normal single lens reflex.

For the photographer used to a 35mm camera this may seem a clumsy and slow camera to work with. The mirror is not of the instant return type and the finder remains blacked out until the film is wound on to the next frame by a large knob on the right hand side of the body. A quick action lever can be purchased to speed this up although there is a knack of turning the knob and the camera against each other which makes it reasonably fast.

The shutter release is at the front right of the body
and is fired to the accompaniment of an enormous ‘kerclunk’. This noise is due to the complexity of the operation. Since the lenses are of the between the lens shutter variety the film has to be blanked off, this is done by a folding shield at the back of the body. The first operation is this moving out of the way, the large mirror then moves out of the light path and lastly the shutter opens to take the shot.

For those occasions when silence is essential, all but the lens shutter can be pre-fired and then the only sound made is the whisper of the leaf shutter opening and closing.

On the lens both the shutter speed control and the aperture control are positioned around the barrel. They are locked together so they can be altered while keeping a constant exposure value set. They can be separated in their action by a small catch, but this is quite a fiddly exercise.

The standard back is the A12, for 12 shots. This has its own folding wind-on lever so the back can be loaded off the camera.

In addition the camera has a depth of field preview, interchangeable viewfinders, multiple exposure ability and an abundance of safety locks that will take the user by surprise for months.

It has often been said, and I think quite fairly, that this is a camera that should only be used on a tripod. For hand-held work most photographers find it a little heavy and awkward.

The standard 80mm f/2.8 Zeiss Planar C lens that fronts this Swedish designed and manufactured machine is the best standard lens available and I doubt whether its superb quality will ever be matched. The quality of a print from this lens is simply breathtaking.

For the world’s best lenses you must expect to pay an appropriate price. However they are a good investment and a five or 10-year-old Hasselblad can still fetch its original price on the secondhand market.
