CANON’S NEW F-1: A VERSATILE “PRO”

MANUFACTURER’S SPECIFICATIONS: Canon New F-1 35mm single-lens reflex camera. Body No. 100794, LENS: 50mm f/1.4 Canon FD In Interchangeable bayonet breech-lock mount, stops to f/22, focusing to 18 in. (0.45 m), accepts 52 mm screw-in or Canon bayonet accessories. SHUTTER: Electro-mechanical hybrid titanium focal-plane with electronically-controlled speeds from 8-1/2000 sec., mechanically-controlled speeds of X sync (1/90 sec.) to 1/2000 sec. plus В operable without battery power, electronic self-timer. VIEWING: Interchangeable eye-level prism with interchangeable focusing screens; standard screen has central split-image rangefinder with surrounding microprism collar, full-focusing outer area. Aperture scale at right of finder with standard prism shows camera-suggested aperture via needle, set aperture via pointer, over/underexposure warning markings set shutter speed below; in shutter-preferred mode with winder or motor and power source mounted, camera-selected aperture and set shutter speed are visible. OTHER FEATURES: Single SPD cell behind viewing screen, powered by 6-v lithium, alkaline-manganese or silver oxide cell in body, reads center-weighted averaging, limited 12% area or 3% central spot area of finder field depending on screen unit fitted; with AE Finder FN, aperture-preferred auto or match-needle readings possible; meter is shutter-release activated In normal mode remains on for 16 sec. in “hold” mode, on and aperture/shutter readouts lit in “light” mode; ASA settings 6-6400, ±2-stop exposure-compensation control; metering at working aperture via stop-down/depth-of-fleid preview control; battery-check button also cancels scale illumination, meter readings, self-timer; built-in eyepiece blind; dedicated contacts in hot shoe provide auto flash-sync speed, auto aperture range readout and/ or setting, recycling indication In finder with Canon New CATS system flash units; electromagnetic shutter release operates mechanically without battery power, multiple-exposure provision; shutter button lock; accepts accessory bulk film back and data back. PRICE: $980 with 50mm f/1.4 Canon FD lens; and standard FN finder; $912 with 50mm f/1.8 Canon FD lens and FN finder; AE Finder, $222.

To say that Canon’s new flagship professional SLR had the camera cognoscenti in a dither when it was officially introduced in July, 1981 is something of an understatement. Aside from the unprecedented nomenclature coup of continuing the traditional F-1 model name (without so much as a subscript letter or logo change) for a radically new camera, there was the little matter of the New F-1’s metering system and finder readouts. Was it possible that the world's most successful producer of auto-exposure SLRs— the wizards who mated electronic calculator concepts and multi-mode exposure automation to give us the still-unrivaled Canon A-1 — had answered the likes of the Nikon F3 and the Pentax LX with something as pedestrian as a match-needle-metering camera with conventional moving needle and lollipopshaped aperture pointer? Well, sort of. If you purchase a Canon New F-1 with the official standard (in the U.S.) Eye-Level Finder FN, that’s exactly what you'll get. But lurking within and without, above and below this remarkable machine, is what might be termed a hyper-modular approach which lets you create just as much or just as little camera as you need for any specific assignment.

We use the word "assignment” purposely, too, for if any SLR we’ve ever handled gives the impression of being a camera designed by pros for pros, this is it. And it's important to remember that professional photographers are an ultra-conservative lot when it comes to selecting equipment. They say all they want is manual exposure control, mechanical shutters, super reliability under hard use and adverse conditions, and no extra gadgets or fripperies. Canon has obviously listened to these influential customers, but the genius of the New F-1’s designers and engineers is in giving professional photographers more than they ever asked for without alienating them. In so doing, they've created a superbly competent and flexible camera that’s destined to serve a much wider spectrum of photographers .

Like the legendary Nikon F of 1959, the heart of the Canon New F-1 is located in its head—that is, in and around the prism area. But in the Canon tradition, the main metering system and control circuitry are in the body, not in the interchangeable pentaprisms. Remove the standard Finder FN, replace it with the slightly taller AE Finder FN, turn the shutter dial to "A” and you've got aperture-preferred auto exposure with full finder readouts below the focusing screen. Mount either the AE Motor Drive FN or the AE Power Winder FN and any of its three power sources to the bottom of the F-1, set the lens aperture dial to the green "A” setting (past f/22 on 50mm lenses), choose your shutter speed and the bottom readout scale disappears; it is replaced by a vertical aperture scale with a needle reading out camera-selected f/stops along the right-hand side of the finder. User-selected shutter speeds appear in a little window directly below the aperture scale.

Just below the slide-out pentaprism, you’ll find something even more ingenious—user-interchangeable focusing screens that provide a choice of center-weighted averaging, limited-area (12%) metering or spot metering (3% in the center of the viewing area). Only six of the more popular screen configurations are available in all three metering patterns, but the remaining seven screen types can be purchased in either center-weighted or selective-area patterns. We'll describe how Canon's clever refinement of off-the-screen metering works a bit later on, but we will note here that all the above-mentioned screens incorporate Canon's new Laser Matte outer focusing area which gives an extraordinarily bright view, and those screens having central split-image rangefinders employ Canon’s stepped “New Split" crossed prisms which obviate partial rangefinder blackout even with lenses as slow as f/5.6.

Before we get into the F-1’s operations, let's say a few words about the camera's basic body construction. Like Nikon and Pen-tax which preceded them, Canon has clearly gone to great lengths to make their top-of-the-line pro SLR hell for strong. The F-1’s main body casting, which comprises virtually the entire body shell, is a model of structural rigidity and, while it's fabricated of alloy for lightness, durability and strength are clearly its primary design objectives.

The only major secondary casting is the squarish alloy casting containing the lens mount, which affixes rigidly to the main body casting with four hefty counter-sunk screws. The chromed brass lens mount is similarly mounted onto this front casting. This system actually increases the strength of the whole body structure and ensures accurate iens-to-film-plane alignment even if the camera is subjected to physical abuse.

Canon is obviously proud of the fact that the F-1 's main body (and the AE Finder FN) are machined on the latest numerically-computer-controlled (NC) milling machine, which reduces the number of machining operations required while increasing accuracy in drilling to ±0.02mm. Other exotic manufacturing techniques include laser-beam welding (instead of rivets) to connect the gear to the pinion shaft of both front and rear shutter curtains, shot-burnishing of these shafts to increase their strength, and sealing and encasing the printed circuit board in a moisture-proof resin. Plastic and rubber seals are found in numerous places within the camera body, including the shutter-release button and shutter-speed dial, and both shutter-curtain release magnets are silver plated “for greater dust- and moisture-proofness."

All right, now that we have a general notion of the new F-1 's identity and capabilities, let’s see how it functions. But first a few passing words on the standard Eye-Level Finder FN, which comes with the FN-PE focusing screen. The “P" in PE stands for “partial" (that is, selective-area) metering, with sensitivity concentrated in the central 12% of the viewing area. The “E” denotes a screen having a central, horizontal, split-image rangefinder surrounded by a microprism collar and full-focusing outer area. In bright light, or when viewing light-colored subjects, the metering area is visible as a clearly-defined grayish rectangle in the middle of the sdreen surrounding the central focusing aids—a sight that should be familiar to “old Canon F-1” owners and users of other previous Canon SLRs with behind-mirror metering systems. However, the metering-area pattern is less pronounced in the New F-1.

Merely hefting the New F-1 with a normal lens mounted gives you a feeling of its overwhelming solidity. This is probably due to a combination of factors—including its medium size, moderate-to-heavyish weight, excellent balance, and ergonomically-rounded contours, including an Action Grip/battery compartment cover on the front that feels even more comfortable than the grips on previous Canons, notably the A-1. Also, to repeat a well-known automotive clichd, all the controls—especially the film-wind lever, shutter-speed dial, and the shutter-release and its surrounding mode-selector collar— fall readily to hand.

Let’s examine this conveniently-placed control cluster in more detail. The film-wind lever is comfortably contoured to the thumb, all plastic, and has a 30° stand-off angle. It's ratcheted to advance in a single 139° stroke or a series of shorter strokes; we’re pleased to report that its action is very good indeed. No, it's not as buttery smooth as the wind lever on an M-series Leica, but it’s a significant improvement over previous Canon SLRs, and the equal of any found on a current SLR. The shutter-release button is also outstanding—light, smooth, and predictable in action, and surrounded by a handily placed mode-selector collar. Grab the knurled-edge tab of the collar and set the white letter “A” opposite the index line adjacent to the rewind control and the meter system is activated. Turn the collar to the red “L” and the shutter button is locked. Select the white “S” setting and press the shutter release and the built-in electronic self-timer counts off 10 sec. with one beep per sec., for the first 8 sec., 2 beeps per sec. for the last 2 sec. until the shutter is released. The shutter-speed dial is conventional except for its extended range from 1 / 2000 sec. to 8 sec. plus the flash sync (at 1 /90 sec.) setting denoted with a blitz mark, B, and the red “A" setting used with the AE finder. Settings from 1-1/2000 sec. are very legibly engraved in white-on-black as are the flash sync and В settings, while timed shutter speeds slower than 1 sec. are in yellow and the “A” setting is in red. To set the shutter dial to "A" (aperture-preferred auto exposure with the AE finder) you have to lift up and turn it simultaneously, thereby minimizing setting errors. But if you do accidentally set the dial to “A” with standard FN finder in place the shutter-speed scale appears below the finder field and the shutter won’t fire until you select a manual shutter speed—a most thoughtful safety feature.

Rounding out the features on the top deck, atop the standard FN prism (and the AE prism as well) is an integral hot shoe with dedicated contacts for Canon electronic flashes using the New CATS system we’ll get to later on. To the left of the prism housing is a large 1'/e-in.-diameter knurled dial surrounding the rewind crank. Push inward on a small silver tap on the dial’s edge as you turn its outer milled surface and you can set ASA/ ISO film speeds from 6-6400 in a small window with an index mark near its center. Despite the extended range, the numerals are legible in green on black. On the right side of the dial is the exposure-compensation scale covering a ±2 stop range in Уз-stop increments. It’s easy to see—and we like the fact that it’s calibrated in the sequence 1/4, 1/2,1 (in green) 2, and 4 to eliminate confusion—but there's no warning signal in the finder or elsewhere to remind you to set it back to "1" after using it. At any rate, it's conveniently set by pressing in a small black button below the aperture scale illumination panel as you turn it to the desired setting.

This brings us to the rewind crank, which works in conjunction with the novel rewind button just behind the shutter button and has a few additional small-but-interesting features. First, to open the hinged camera back you must press in the silver colored safety lock button (Canon calls it a Safety Stopper) located at about 2 o’clock with respect to the ASA/compensation dial, as you pull up sharply on the rewind crank. To rewind the film you rotate the notched part of the swiveling top of the rewind “button" toward the back of the camera, then push it in until it clicks. Now you can unfold the rewind crank and rewind the film. The crank itself is very easy to turn, without the nasty habit of folding in mid-wind like some other cranks that have been engineered to clear top-mounted accessories, and it’s comfortable as well. However, don’t make the mistake of trying to turn it without unfolding the crank first or you won’t accomplish a thing. Presumably, the fact that the rewind crank is free-wheeling when folded reduces the friction on the film wind by some minuscule quantity. The fact that the New F-1 is capable of 5 fps on the highspeed setting with the motor drive probably has something to do with this.

Although the front of the Canon New F-1 is sufficiently unadorned to appear spartan, some important features lurk within its smooth contours. First, there’s the battery compartment behind the removable Action Grip. Press in a small black button concealed under the bulge of the grip and lift it off, revealing the compartment containing a 6-v lithium, alkaline-manganese, or silver-oxide battery (our F-1 came with a Japanese-made lithium battery, the type recommended for cold weather use). The bottom or negative terminal at the bottom of the chamber is spring loaded for added security (the camera will work normally even if you lose the grip/ cover), but there’s an ulterior motive afoot here. Suppose you press the battery check button (it's atop the left-hand front of the prism housing behind the mounted lens) and the needle in the finder fails to move above the battery check mark on the aperture scale or fails to move at all? That means you have a weak or dead battery, respectively. Indeed, if the battery is too weak to provide accurate exposure readings, the shutter won’t fire. But, you protest, in the specifications listed at the beginning of this very report it states that the Canon New F-1 has an electro-mechanical hybrid shutter providing mechanically-timed speeds of 1/90 sec. (flash sync), 1/ 125-1/2000 sec. plus В without any battery power. That’s true, and to get to them you must first remove the dead battery, thus releasing the spring-loaded negative contact in the battery compartment which activates the mechanical shutter-timing mechanism. If there's any more effective means of letting the photographer know he's out of “juice” we haven’t heard of it. However, despite the ingenuity of Canon’s engineers and the accolades of professional photographers for providing a commendably complete range of nobattery shutter speeds, there is a small fly in the molybdenum disulfide lube. No, it's not the mechanically-timed shutter speeds themselves, which are quite accurate; it’s the shutter-release button. Remove the battery and the release is no longer electromagnetic but mechanical, and unfortunately its performance deteriorates from superb to merely acceptable, with a coarse, stiffish action requiring relatively high finger pressure.

Returning to the battery-check button, it does several things besides check on battery power and is, in effect, a main circuit turn-off switch. It can be used to cancel the self-timer in mid-beep, turn off the meter and meter scale illumination in the “Hold" or “Light” modes we’ll detail shortly, or to terminate long auto exposures made in very dim light. On the right-hand side of the mirror box, near its bottom, is the time-honored Canon aperture-stop-down control which permits manual or aperture-preferred auto exposures at working aperture. Press it in and release it, exposing a red warning band on the plunger, and Canon FD lenses will stop down to the aperture set on the f/stop ring, the lollipopshaped aperture pointer appearing on the aperture scale in match-needle mode will disappear; non-coupling, manual or fixed-diaphragm optics can be metered manually (with respect to a fixed index line opposite the f/5.6 setting on the aperture scale at the right of the finder) or automatically (with the AE prism fitted and the shutter-speed dial set to "A”). Like the battery-check button, the stop-down control does more than meets the eye, but it must be used with caution. Press it while the exposure is being made, or try to mount a lens with a plunger in the “out” position, and you can jam the camera.

Turning to the back of the New F-1 we find two small-but-significant controls near the top. To the left of the rubber eyepiece bezel on both the plain and AE prism finders is an eyepiece-shutter lever. Move it toward the right, uncovering a red warning dot, and a blind comes into position to prevent stray light from entering the eyepiece when the photographer’s eye isn’t up to the finder, thus causing inflated readings. This is an extremely important feature on any SLR which meters off the screen, particularly a pro SLR which may often be used with remote-firing accessories. Just below the rewind knob is a second small-but-vital control, a knurled-edge dial with a white index line that can be set to "Normal," "Hold” or “Light.’’ The "Normal” setting is, as you would suspect, the most commonly used, and it’s the most energy-efficient in terms of battery consumption. On “Normal,” the camera’s metering and readout systems are activated only when the shutter collar control is set to “A” or “S," and the shutter-release button is pressed partway in. In the AE modes, the needle points to either the camera-selected shutter speed or aperture, and in match-needie mode with the plain FN finder, the needle points to the camera -suggested aperture as long as you maintain pressure on the release. Relax your finger and the meter turns off instantly. Set the control knob to “Hold," press the shutter button once and the meter stays on continuously for 16 sec. and then turns itself off. Select the “Light" position and press the shutter button and the meter stays on for 16 sec. as above and the aperture scale and set shutter speed in the window below it lights up—a boon to "available darkness” photographers or those shooting with flash in dim light. And how do you light up the shutter-speed and set-aperture scales appearing below the finder image when the AE finder is used in aperture-preferred mode? You don't—the light is built into the body, but not into the AE finder and it therefore works only in conjunction with match-needle and shutter-preferred meter modes. Is there anything else significant on the F-1’s backside? Just the standard film-box-end clip on the removable back.

Now that we've covered the F-1’s basic controls (with the exception of the bottom-mounted components which we’ll get to in discussing the motors and winders) let us load up and take some pictures using the three basic exposure modes and the three separate meterinc patterns. To load the New F-1, open the back as previously described and load the leader into the multi-slotted take-up spool Aside from minor touches such as extra long film-plane and film-guide rails, twin film-guide rollers which come into position over the sprocket wheel as the back is closed, and a standard Canon cartridge orientation spring on the opposite side of the oversized, beveled pressure plate, it’s all very straightforward. Not surprisingly, the overall finish of the interior is a notch or two above that found in “mass market” Canons such as the AE-1. Oh yes, below the right side of the bottom film-guide rail is an electric contact for the Data Back FN. The data information panel therein is thereby illuminated as the shutter fires.

Presuming we’ve now wound on three blank exposures, bringing the smallish-but-legible additive exposure counter in front of the wind-lever from “S" to “1,’’ and have set the ASA dial appropriately, let's take some photos using the standard, match-needlemetering FN finder and its PE selective-area metering screen. Set the shutter release collar to “A” and the meter-mode selector to "Normal,’’ bring the camera to eye level and press the shutter release partway in. Instantly, the meter needle in the vertical aperture scale to the right of the finder field rises to the aperture that will give a correct exposure with the numerical shutter speed we’ve selected and the film speed set. By maintaining slight pressure on the release the meter remains on and the needle stays put. Now with the left hand, grab the knurled aperture ring near the back of the 50mm f/1.4 Canon FD lens and turn it until the lollipop-shaped, set-aperture-indicating follow-pointer moves over the needle so the needle bisects its circular end. Aside from the fact that the F-1 's needle pops up to suggested aperture position very swiftly, this is the time-honored match-needle system that’s been in use for over 20 years. Refinements? Yes, minor ones. The red "underexposure” or "below meter range" band near the bottom of the vertical aperture scale moves, as the lens is mounted, to indicate the maximum aperture of the lens in use, and the aperture needle moves only between the minimum and maximum apertures of the lens fitted. The upper red “overexposure" area covers the range from above f/16 to above f/32 and has notches in between f/16 and f/22, and f/22 and f/32. But it's stationary, so you have to remember the minimum aperture of the lens in use to know whether to select a faster shutter speed. Canon thoughtfully points out in their instruction booklet that the diameter of the aperture-pointer circle represents one full stop and the width of the stop-down-metering index line is one-half stop, so you may adjust the exposure to your taste while metering, without using the exposure-compensation control. The meter will not read if the shutter dial is set to the flash sync setting or to B, and the shutter will not fire with the lens aperture set to “A" unless the motor or winder is mounted—intelligent and worthwhile safety features that will be appreciated by hard-pressed working pros.

All right, now let's mount the AE finder. To do so, first grab hold of the standard FN finder by its two back corners so that your thumb and forefinger press in the two finder lock buttons, and slide it back and off the camera. As you do so, notice the beautifully-finished, very precise tongue-in-groove mounting system, the little “prism window” on the left side of the prism unit (which reflects the aperture scale from a tiny oblong window under the camera’s left-hand prism-mounting groove into the finder), and the four electric contacts under the front of the prism (which transfer information between mounted Canon flash units via the dedicated hot shoe atop the prism). Now slide the AE Finder FN in place until it clicks and you’re ready to go.

Physically, the AE finder is quite similar to the ordinary FN finder except that it's sAe in. taller, incorporates a light-collecting panel for the aperture-preferred readout scale near the top of its front panel, and has an arm containing an ingenious switch emerging from its right-hand side. Here's how it works.

If you haven’t mounted a motor or winder, and neither the lens aperture nor the shutter-speed dial is set to “A,” the AE finder operates precisely like the ordinary FN finder, with the same match-needle scale appearing to the right of the finder field. The only difference is that F-1 s purchased with the AE finder are fitted with Focusing Screen FN-AE, providing the same array of central focusing aids but having a center-weighted averaging sensitivity pattern. Canon deems this the appropriate sensitivity pattern for auto-exposure photography.

To get aperture-preferred automation with the AE finder, all you do is turn the shutter-speed dial to "2000," then lift and turn it to the red "A” setting just past it. As you do this a pin located in between the flash sync mark and the 8-sec. setting on the shutter dial contacts a spring-loaded switch under the aforementioned “arm" on the right side of the prism housing. This simultaneously sets the camera’s circuitry for aperture-preferred automation and changes the finder readouts dramatically. An opaque cover slides in place over the right-hand aperture scale, causing it to disappear from view and a wide, horizontal shutter-speed scale with readout needle and a separate set-aperture window at its right come into view below the finder field. Aside from being a dramatic way to let you know you're in aperture-preferred mode, Canon's system effectively eliminates "finder readout clutter,” keeping the visible digits to the bare minimum required.

To get the set aperture in the little window to the right of the shutter-speed scale, Canon has employed the standard method of reflecting it off the lens aperture ring via a tiny angled prism in the AE finder’s overhanging front section, just below the Canon nameplate. As for the shutter-speed scale, its large, black-on-white digits and readout needle are clearly visible in ail but the dimmest light, it's bounded on either side by red under- and overexposure warning areas, and it covers the range from 8-1 /1000 sec. That's right—1/1000 sec. is the top shutter-speed limit in aperture-preferred mode, whereas 1 / 2000 sec. is available in both match-needle and shutter-preferred modes. Finally, Canon warns that camera-selected shutter speeds in aperture-preferred mode are determined the moment the shutter is pressed, so if the light changes in the instant between release and execution, or while the shutter fires, this won't be taken into consideration and poor exposures may result. In shutter-preferred mode the reverse is true—the camera-selected aperture can be modified up to the very moment of exposure.

At any rate, in our opinion, the AE finder adds so little to the F-1’s bulk or weight (it weighs but 1 Vi oz. more than the standard finder), and extends the camera’s versatility so substantially that it’s hard for us to envision even the most hidebound pro or the most conservative advanced amateur ordering the camera with the standard finder alone. Since both prism finders can be used in the shutter-preferred mode with a motor or winder attached to the camera, one gains much and loses virtually nothing in opting for the more versatile AE finder.

As long as we’ve brought the subject up, let's mount the AE motor Drive FN and see how the camera works in conjunction with it to provide shutter-preferred automation. Either the motor or the AE Power Winder FN and a functioning power pack must be attached to the F-1 before it will work in the shutter-preferred mode—yet another thoughtful safety feature—but we'll concentrate on the remarkably compact motor drive because it's more interesting and comprehensive, and more in keeping with the Canon F-1 's professional status.

To begin this little adventure, turn the camera upside-down and examine its bottom plate with the lens pointing downwards. You’d better have a dime or a penny in your hand because you've got to remove three round cover plates before you can affix the motor. On the left-hand end, next to the six winder and motor-drive terminals is the rewind coupler cover (which needn’t be removed when mounting the winder). Unscrew it and you'll see a hole through which the motor's power rewind shaft passes to engage the extended end of the film-cartridge spool. So the small price you pay for having power rewind is not being able to remove the motor with film in the camera— just like the Nikon F3. About an inch to the right of the aforementioned cover is another smaller cover which must be removed before mounting either the winder or the motor. This is the AE coupler cover; it frees the camera’s internal mechanisms to operate in shutter-preferred mode. On the right-hand end of the bottom plate is the last cover you must remove to obtain powered film advance. Naturally enough, it’s called the winding coupler cover. Finally, about half an inch to the left of the winding coupler cover, there’s an auxiliary rewind button that mates with a rewind shaft that emerges from the motor unit as you slide the motor’s rewind switch on. This eliminates the need for pressing the rewind button before power rewinding.

Now that we’ve unscrewed our little trio of protective covers, where do we store them? Easy, just nest them together inside each other and screw them into the threaded compartment on the bottom of the motor unit. Now, before mounting the motor, let's check the condition of the 6-v battery in the camera body. Why? Because the battery can’t be removed once the motor is mounted—the vertical grip/release gets in the way. Finally, before screwing the motor unit into the camera’s tripod socket, Canon advises you to check that the tabs on the motor’s film-wind coupler engage the notches in the camera’s winding coupler. Now, with your thumb on the motor’s mounting screw, orient the motor drive unit, making sure that the locating pin adjacent to the film-wind coupler slides into the proper hole in the camera bottom, and screw the motor securely in place.

Before the motor will work, we obviously need a power source. Canon gives you a choice of three: the Battery Pack FN, usable with 12 AA cells of any type but nicads, the rechargeable Ni-Cd Pack FN (an extremely lightweight unit with non-removable nicad cell which we used for the bulk of our tests), and the larger, heavier High Power Ni-Cd Power Pack FN. In terms of framing speed, Canon claims that the AA Battery Pack and the High Power Ni-Cd Pack provide 3.5 fps on “low” speed setting and 5 fps on “high” speed setting, respectively, whereas the regular Ni-Cd Pack provides 3 fps and 4.5 fps at these settings. In addition, the larger packs will reportedly advance up to 50 rolls at normal temperatures, while the smaller Ni-Cd Pack will run 30 rolls of film through the camera. The High Power Ni-Cd Pack is the obvious choice for cold weather photographers as it will advance approximately 20 rolls of film even at -4° F, while the other two power sources will only advance five rolls. All three power packs have covered remote-control outlets at the back, locking auxiliary shutter buttons in cavities in their right sides for more convenient vertical shooting, and a set of five electric contacts on a raised circular platform which mate with similar contacts at the bottom of the motor’s right-handed grip. To mount any of the power packs, orient the stud on the pack’s left-hand end with a matching receptacle on the bottom of the motor, flip the locking tab on the left-hand side of the motor to “lock” position, and with your much-used coin of the realm, secure the pack to the motor with a locking screw on its right-hand end. Presuming you’ve got fresh batteries in your pack or your nicad unit is charged, you’re now ready to begin shooting.

Before we attempt shutter-preferred metering, let’s examine the motor's controls in more detail. Atop the comfortably contoured grip is a conveniently-angled, larger shutter button with surrounding knurled selector collar. Lift and turn the collar and you can set white-on-black letters S (single frame), L (low speed), H (high speed) and OFF (in orange) opposite a fixed white index line. Since we've just detailed the comparative framing rates, the meaning of these should be obvious. On the back of the motor unit are additional controls which are likewise logically arrayed. To the right of center there’s the standard subtractive frame counter that turns the motor off once the counter reaches zero, and there's a reset button to its right which sets the counter back to “S," and a knurled metal wheel marked "SET” for setting the counter to the number of frames on the roll or the number you’d like to shoot in a given sequence. Numbers 36, 24, 20, and 12 as well as numbers 6 through 0 appear in orange rather than white-on-black. Just below the “SET” control is a red warning lamp which lights when you reach the end of the roll or when you've finished rewinding (to remind you to turn off the power rewind switch). Near the left-hand end of the motor is the sliding rewind switch. You must push in a little lock button to its left as you slide the switch—yet another small but thoughtful safety feature. With fresh batteries, a 36-exposure roll is completely rewound in about 10 sec. If that's too fast to avoid static marks in cold or dry weather, you can always rewind manually as previously described with the motor in place. Oh yes, that little cover above the rewind lock button on the motor is labeled F.C. to indicate that behind it is a set of six contacts that mate with the Film Chamber FN-100, the F-1's 100-exposure magazine.

In use, the F-1/AE Finder/Motor Drive/Ni-Cd Pack combination works splendidly. Indeed, in terms of overall capabilities, balance, convenience and handling it rivals the Nikon F3 motor drive combo we praised so highly, and provides the additional benefit of shutter-preferred automation, a feature lacking on both the Pentax LX and the Nikon F3. To select shutter-preferred mode you simply press the button located just past the green “A" setting on the aperture ring of current Canon FD lenses and move the aperture ring so the "A" setting appears opposite the orange index line atop the lens barrel. You also have to select a timed shutter speed other than the flash sync setting or "A.” If you leave the shutter dial set to "A” you’ll get aperture-preferred automation at f/22— which usually gives you non-hand-holdable shutter speeds.

Once you select a reasonable shutter speed and then turn the aperture ring to “A" with the motor or winder attached, the lollipop-shaped aperture pointer disappears and the moving needle reads out the camera-selected aperture as long as you keep the shutter button partially depressed or select "Hold” or “Light" modes on the mode selector. This analog readout system is so clear, decisive, and informative at a glance that Canon’s reasons for choosing this "dated" method are evident. Also, most pros prefer it. But aren’t digital electronics more rugged? Perhaps, but in the "auto” modes, the finder readouts are only indicators—the actual exposure is set electronically.

Some experts (including some members of our staff) criticized Canon for not providing both aperture- and shutter-preferred modes in the body without the need for adding extra accessories. When you consider that the Canon A-1 has these modes and more built in, their complaints seem to make sense. However, the F-1’s concept of providing discrete finder readouts for each auto-exposure mode works very well in practice, and the FN motor and winder are so well engineered and unobtrusive in use that few pros will object to the extra size and weight needed to get shutter-preferred automation. Final pros and cons: The motor's (and winder's) shutter buttons are exemplary in action and “feel,” but advancing film manually with the wind lever and the power turned off feels rough and requires excessive effort.

This brings us to the screens, which comprise an integral part of Canon’s unique metering concept. We've already mentioned each metering pattern that's available, but here's how they work. In between the actual focusing screen and condenser lens in each screen unit is a thin layer of plexiglass. Etched into it—in an overall pattern with center-weighted averaging screens, a small control rectangular pattern with selective-area screens, and a central circular dot with spotmetering screens—is a linear "corrugated" grid pattern incorporating a special coating. This pattern acts as a "micro” beam splitter, allowing most of the light striking it to pass upwards to the finder, but deflecting a small portion of the light straight back through a small rectangular aperture at the back of the frame of each focusing screen unit. At the back of the mounted screen, in the camera body itself, is a matching rectangular port containing the SPD meter ceil. The illumination for metering is thus tunneled through the screen to the cell, and the metering sensitivity pattern can be varied according to the configuration of the micro beam splitter in each screen.

Exchanging screens is a simple matter. Slide off the prism or other finder, hook a stout fingernail into one of two notches at the rear of the screen-retaining "frame" in the camera body, pull up the screen unit, lift it out, insert the new screen (remembering to hook the front surface of the replacement screen in first) and push its rear section down. It mounts firmly with a light click and is held in precise alignment by a tab at the front and two spring-loaded fingers at the rear. This procedure does Jake a bit of getting used to, and folks with nonexistent or weak fingernails may require a pen knife or equivalent to exchange screens in the F-1. But overall, we judge this screen-interchange system to be one of the handiest and most secure we've encountered.

Since Canon’s promotional literature touts these laser matte screens with considerable vigor, extolling their superior brightness, ”fo-cusability," and high performance focusing aids, we scrutinized them with particular care, and compared the F-1’s finder side-byside with the brightest, easiest-to-focus cameras we’ve previously tested. Our verdict: In terms of brightness, very few cameras on the market can equal the Canon F-1's finder/ screen combo, and fortunately, the brightness has not been achieved at the expense of lowered contrast as it has been with other cameras. Also, the split-image rangefinder with surrounding microprism collar on both our test screens worked extremely well with a wide range of lenses, including ultra-wide-angles and long teles of moderate (f/4.5-5.6) apertures, providing decisive and repeatable focusing accuracy even under unfavorable lighting conditions. In short, the view through the F-1's viewfinder is undeniably one of the camera’s most attractive features.

Since the Canon New F-1 is the only truly professional “system" SLR to provide a range of meter-sensitivity patterns, perhaps the following criticisms should be taken in context, but nevertheless herewith its shortcomings. Obviously, obtaining spot or limited-area metering by switching screens is less convenient than turning a dial to accomplish the same thing. And while the Leica R4 only provides for two meter-sensitivity patterns on its meter-mode dial, a pro working in dusty conditions, for example, would prefer not to have to remove the prism and switch the screen to do so. Also, Canon states in the F-1 instruction manual that spot-metering screens and even limited (12%) areametering screens are not the best choice when using either of the camera’s auto-exposure modes. Why? Because, despite its plethora of other useful features and clever engineering the F-1 lacks one significant feature found on many less formidable SLRs—a provision for taking a reading and holding the exposure. Oh, the exposure-mode dial on the back of the camera has a position marked "Hold" all right, but this just “holds" the meter on for 16 sec. and the meter needle moves if the light varies during that period. Given this state of affairs, Canon is indeed correct—the best screens to use in either auto-exposure mode are those designed for center-weighted averaging readings. If you can’t take a selective reading and then hold it as you recompose the shot, even the limited (12%) screens may lead to poor auto-exposures if the main subject is not in the center of the viewing area. Our field test results bore this out—and it is, perhaps, the only major technical shortcoming of this otherwise superb camera.

This brings us to the subject of auto-flash photography. Slide one of the half-dozen dedicated Canon units (or a compatible unit by an independent flash manufacturer) into the F-1 's hot shoe and two wonderful things happen. As soon as the unit recycles, it automatically sets the camera to the 1/90 sec. flash sync speed. It's read out in the finder by the shutter-speed needle in the aperture-preferred mode and in shutter-preferred mode the aperture automatically sets the lens to the flash range f/stop you’ve set on the back of the flash unit. In match-needle mode you must set the aperture ring on the lens to the needle-indicated f/stop, but you needn’t remove your eye from the finder—just turn the lens ring until the aperture pointer aligns with the meter needle. None of the above systems operate if the shutter-speed dial is set to B, and once you release the shutter, the camera automatically switches back to the speed set on the shutter-speed dial until the flash unit recycles and the pilot light glows. While this New CATS flash system will certainly cover the majority of flash needs, and fully manual operation is always available, there is no doubt that off-the-film flash metering (as found in the Pentax LX, Nikon F3, and Olympus OM-2n among others) is the preferable alternative since it’s usable with all manner of macro and micro setups and will integrate overall flash readings from complex multi-flash lighting arrangements. No, it’s not a crucial enough omission to negate all the many marvelous capabilities built into the Canon New F-1, but we wish Canon had managed to sneak It in.

Despite its minor foibles, and because of its numerous examples of enlightened, straightforward thinking, the New Canon F-1 is clearly one of the finest, most competent and best built, and cleverly conceived singlelens reflex cameras we’ve ever tested. And it's sure to give its competitors a run for the money in the top-drawer professional SLR field. Though complex in design and construction it is essentially simple, reliable, and easy to understand in actual use. It offers the technical sophistication of multi-modes, but the elegant simplicity of one mode and one finder readout system at a time, and its ability to provide three useful metering patterns by changing screens is unique. Finally, its accessories—particularly the motor drive and winder—are engineered to complement the basic camera in an uncommonly felicitous way, actually enhancing its balance and handling while providing extended shooting and metering capabilities. Perhaps the nicest thing that one can say about the New Canon F-1 is that it is a camera that successfully upholds Canon's image as the world’s leading camera maker and extends it to the toughest, most competitive segment of the market—the uncompromising, no-nonsense, put-up-or-shut-up realm of the working professional photographer.

Optical bench analysis: In the center of the image field at maximum aperture we observed very slight overcorrected spherical aberration, and slight red-purple flare. However, the image had a tight, bright core, characteristic of well-corrected optics; the flare was virtually absent by f/2.8 and nearly diffraction limited (perfect pattern) by f/5.6

Toward the corners of the field, we noted moderate skew-ray flare at f/1.4, with slight astigmatism. The former aberration was reduced to very slight by f/4 and the latter was gone by f/5.6. The corner image was nearly diffraction limited by f/8, but very slight lateral color persisted.

Field test slides: In the center of the picture at f/1.4 we observed an overall softness and slight loss of detail, but by f/2 contrast and sharpness improved noticeably. By f/8 central image quality is superb. In the corners of the field at f/1.4 detail in on-film images was satisfactory, but the images looked soft. By f/4 contrast and sharpness improve markedly, and this high level of image quality holds at smaller apertures.

We noted somewhat higher than average flare in pictures shot with this lens at maximum aperture and at adverse shooting angles (back- and extreme-angle side light).



