Chinon cameras were once regarded as being not quite up to scratch. They lagged behind the major manufacturers in design and, it was often thought, quality. The Chinon CE-4 has reversed this completely as it is a high specification camera with a budget price tag.

This lightweight, compact camera takes Pentax ‘K’ bayonet mount lenses and accessories, a brace of dedicated flash units and one of the most interesting autowinders available. It also has several features usually associated with more expensive cameras.

The range of shutter speeds which can be selected in the manual mode run from 4 to 1 /1 OOOsec, this dial sits in the conventional position on the right of the pentaprism housing. Three additional settings on this dial are B for longer exposures, auto which sets the camera in that mode and off which locks the camera. The flash synch speed is 1/60sec marked red on the dial. Flash can either be fired from the prism mounted hot-shoe, which has an extra contact for the use of dedicated units, or by a P/C socket on the left side of the lens mounting. When set to auto the shutter speeds are stepless and the range extends up to eight seconds.

The film speed dial is centred around the re-wind knob with its folding lever and is between 25 and 3200ASA. Around this is the exposure compensation control and this rather lets the rest of the design down. It is for a single stop only and is set by moving the ASA dial to an approximate mark, this is click stopped in third stop increments, but even so one stop is not really sufficient and it would be very easy to forget that the override had been set.

The shutter release is threaded for a cable release and is at the centre of the shutter speed dial. The wind-on lever has a pleasant feel and a short throw. Right in front of this is the multiple exposure switch. This is operated before winding-on and allows the shutter to be cocked without advancing the film. The switch can be used for any number of exposures on a single frame and the film frame counter only registers when film is advanced so you always know how many shots have been taken.

The frame counter itself is at the right hand end of the top plate, is additive and zeros when the back is opened.
The delayed action self-timer is on the front of the body. There are two possible delays, five and 10 seconds, the one required is set and the shutter release fired, an LED at the centre of the switch then flashes to warn it is working. This LED also lights each time the shutter is fired and remains lit as long as the shutter is opened. Since the photographer would normally be behind the camera and unable to see it there seems little point in this feature.

On the right side of the lens mounting is the stop-down lever. This can be used for previewing depth of field or for making stop-down exposure readings with older type screw mount lenses.

At the bottom left of the lens mount is the memory button - most useful when using the auto setting and one which largely negates my criticism of the exposure compensation control. With this a reading can be taken of the subject, the button pressed and as long as this is depressed the reading will be ‘locked in’ so the subject could be re-framed or the shooting position changed without fear of a ‘false’ reading giving incorrect exposure.

The back is detachable for the fitting of one of the most elaborate data backs available.

The camera has two winders: the 540 which allows single frame or continuous shooting of up to two frames per second and the 530, which offers the same as the 540 but has the addition of an intervalometer allowing for time lapse sequences or a pre-set number of frames to be fired.

The meter is driven by two Silicon cells which give a centre-weighted reading. To the left of the finder screen is a scale of shutter speeds. Opposite each of these are over and under exposure warnings and a red LED which lights for the speed that will be given after a first pressure on the shutter release. In the manual mode the correct shutter speed for the selected aperture is indicated by a lit LED. The shutter speed set flashes, turning the dial will bring the two together and for correct exposure only one is alight.

This is a pleasant camera to use and for its price is packed with features usually seen on far more expensive cameras. The standard lens may let the body down a little as its performance is rather disappointing. However with the Pentax ‘K’ bayonet mount there are many excellent alternatives available.
