There was a time when no self respecting photographer would have been seen out of doors without his twin lens reflex camera. Times and fashions change arifi this is now the only fixed lens TLR around. It has a built-in CdS meter and will take either 12 shots on standard 120 roll film, giving negatives 21/4ins square (6 x 6cms) or 24 exposures on the double length, hard to find, 220 size.

The principle of the TLR camera is fairly straightforward. It has two lenses of the same focal length. The lower one ‘takes’ the shot, the upper one projects the image of what ‘it sees’ onto a mirror which is viewed from above for framing, and since both lenses are on a common panel, for focusing.

The meter is set above both lenses and does not act through the lens. Unlike a single lens reflex there is no pentaprism or mechanism to stop the lens down and no need for the mirror to move. It has, therefore, far fewer moving parts so there is less chance of breakdowns and mechanical failures at vital moments.

The Yashica Mat is focused by a large knob on the left hand side of the body, for critical work there is a flip-up magnifier in the hood over the viewing screen. Once the subject is sharp this can be flipped out of the way and the shot composed same size on the ground glass screen.

On the other side of the body is the winding lever, which folds flat when not in use. This must be wound one way to advance the film and turned back to cock the shutter. At the start of a film, after loading, this winds on to frame one automatically, and at the end it
winds off continuously.

The shutter release is at the bottom right of the lens panel, this is threaded to take a standard cable release and has a locking collar around it. Frame numbers are shown in a small window above the wind-on lever and the number of frames on the roll, either 12 or 24 is shown above.

Before the roll is loaded the film pressure plate in the camera back must be set for 120 or 220 film. This is because 220 film has no backing paper and therefore must be brought slightly closer to the lens for the best focus.

Adjusting the shutter speed and aperture is a simple matter of turning one of two small wheels set between the lenses. The values set can be seen in a small window above the upper, viewing, lens.

On the top plate of the camera is the film speed setting and the metering window. This is a simple needle matching operation with the cell pointing forward at the subject. The meter system is switched on whenever the hood is opened and stays on until it is closed - so it is not a good idea to walk around all day with it open.

The taking lens is an 80mm f/3.5 which gives astonishingly good results. Despite the fact that prints will come from a larger negative and so be far better defined and sharper than those the 35mm user is used to seeing, this is still a first class piece of optical glass.

The shutter is of the leaf, between the lens variety so an electronic flash gun can be synchronised at any shutter speed that the user desires.
