With this camera the bond between Yashica and the Contax design team has been finally sealed. Even more so than the manual only FX-3 this has the hallmarks of the classic Contax lines.

It is a compact, lightweight camera that has broken with the bold, bulky Yashica lines of old. The suffix Quartz on the code letters tells us that the electrical and mechanical timing operations are carried out by this remarkable element, contributing to a smaller, lighter whole.

The folding re-wind lever sits in a knob surrounded by the film speed dial running, from 25 to 1600ASA. This is shown against the exposure compensation which gives + or - one or two steps override by setting the film speed against the appropriate mark.

The hot-shoe has one additional contact for the use of Yashica dedicated flash guns.

The shutter speed dial sits where it would be expected to be. Manual speeds are between 1 /^ 000 and 1 sec plus and X for electronic flash synchronisation at 1/100sec and B for longer exposures. AE sets the camera in its automatic mode and the camera will deliver stepless shutter speeds to give correct exposure for the aperture selected on the lens.

The large, electro-magnetic shutter release button is at the centre of this dial, with no cable release fitting. As with other Yashica/Contax cameras remote firing is carried out by means of an electronic switch on an extension cable.

The wind-on lever is smooth in operation and has a 20° stand-off angle with a short, positive throw. The frame counter is beside this, is additive and zeros when the back is opened.

On the back of the top plate, just below the wind-on lever, is the battery check button - very important since without power nothing on this camera will work.

The front of the camera has the look of the Contax 139 with its main control on the top right. This has a centre button which sets the meter working when
pressed and illuminates the finder LEDs for 10 seconds. The outer ring around this button can be turned to lock an exposure into the camera’s memory when set to auto and it also sets the electronic self timer which is indicated by a flashing LED on the front of the body and a bleeping sound.

Down the right side of the screen, and just in shot the shutter speeds are shown. Beside these are the LEDs which indicate the speed that the camera will deliver in the auto mode. When set for manual operation the speed which will give correct exposure is steadily lit and the speed set flashes. When the exposure lock is in use the shutter speed that the system recalls flashes. In addition there is an over exposure signal, LT for those occasions when the auto exposure will be more than two seconds, and full flash information when the camera is used in conjunction with a dedicated gun. One additional warning is the bleeping emitted when there is danger of over exposure.

The heart of the metering system is a Silicon cell in the head and the Quartz timing means that the shutter speeds are totally accurate.

The body has the same plush covering as the upmarket Contax models and will accept the 139 winder offering framing up to two frames per second.

The standard lens supplied is the Yashica ML 50mm f/2 which gives surprisingly good results for a budget price optic.

Using the camera is very pleasant but it does take a little getting used to. Once you are familiar with the unusually placed meter switch you wonder why no other company thought of it or have since adopted it.

For those wanting to start up a first class system who do not have a Contax class bank account this camera will give practically all the 139 has to offer. There is always room for criticism of any camera - my main one of this is the lack of a separate P/C flash socket, the addition of one would have completed this excellent machine.
