Over the last few years the Yashica and Contax lines have been moving closer together and are now reaching the stage that they could not be distinguished on a new model if the name plate on the front of the prism housing were blacked out. The FX-D and its manual alternative the FX-3 follow the lines of the Contax 139 closely. This camera has manual exposure control by means of Silicon cells and LED viewfinder indication and comes in a lightweight matt black package.

As with other manual cameras it is simple to use with the minimum of clutter and complexities.

The re-wind knob on the left of the top plate has a folding lever for greater acceleration. The hot-shoe on the pentaprism has no additional contacts for dedicated flash and is the only means of firing a flash. Unfortunately there is no P/C socket on the camera.

The deep, knurled shutter speed selection dial has speeds from 1 to 1 /1 OOOsec and B for longer exposure times. The X synching speed for electronic flash is 1 /125 and is picked out in a light red. This dial will turn through 360° so shifting from a fast to a slow shutter speed can be carried out guickly.

This whole dial is lifted and turned to alter the film speed setting, which appears in a small window at the fast end of the scale. This runs from 12 to 1600ASA with third stop increments indicated by white dots.

The threaded shutter release button has a surrounding collar on which the finger can be rested between shots. Beside this and in front of the wind-on lever is the frame counter which is additive and selfzeroing when the back is opened.

The wind on lever operates in a single throw and can be left at a stand-off ‘parked’ position.
On the front right of the body is the delayed action self timer which is mechanical and runs for 10 seconds.

As with so many cameras in this class there is no linkage for a motor of any form.

The metering system of the FX-3 operates in rather a novel way - it is easy to see the Porsche designers’ thought processes working here. A switch on the back just below the wind-on lever turns the meter circuit on. This is a very easy action at the end of film advancing action - the button is exactly where the thumb comes to rest, this is pushed down and the viewfinder LED lights up. It would not be necessary to repeat this between every shot as light rarely alters that quickly.

To the right of the focusing screen are three LEDs. These are a top red + sign, a central green spot and a lower red - sign. When the green lights up exposure is correct - the others indicate under and over exposure in which case adjustment of either aperture or shutter speed is necessary. If two light up simultaneously, then you are within approximately V2 stop and exposure could be affected.

The split image rangefinder at the centre of the screen is a diagonal line which means that either vertical or horizontal lines can be selected for focusing.

The standard lens is the Yashica DSB 55mm f/2. This is slightly long in focal length for my liking but there are those who would disagree. The results are, of course, not comparable to those of a Contax optic and given the choice I would fit this body with the 50mm f/1.7 Zeiss Planar T*. With this excellent lens the combination would be almost unbeatable.
