Great Wall DF-2 camera

Great Wall DF series cameras were produced by the Beijing Camera Factory in the 1970s and 1980s. There were four cameras from DF-2 to DF-5. In addition to being supplied to the domestic market, there was also a very small amount of export sales, which were relatively popular at the time. You can buy it at the eager overseas Chinese store [Friendship Store] or the overseas Chinese counter in the department store with overseas Chinese service coupons and foreign exchange coupons. Different models of Great Wall DF actually have very small changes. DF-3 adds a Selfie, DF-4 adds a flash socket, and the "most advanced" DF-5 only adds a Selfie and flash socket. . In addition, DF-4 and DF-5 are packaged in a cowhide hard cover, which is the so-called export type. The output is relatively small and the workmanship is relatively better. A few years ago, it sold for more than 1,500 yuan in a store in Dongdan Beizhao Factory in Beijing. Think about how expensive it is, but haven't the prices of Haiou's double-reflective mirrors also increased across the board?

Someone may have questions? Why does Great Wall only have four models from DF-2 to DF-5? Yes, because there is no Great Wall DF-1! Because there is no information to check, no one is sure what it is for? The author analyzed that after the first batch came out that year, there were no subsequent models. They just released the "GREAT WALL". This model of machine should be visible on the bottom cover card. After it was officially produced and put on the market, it was discovered that the camera had many shortcomings, such as no selfie and flash sockets and connection holes, etc., so I thought of developing other models to make up for the shortcomings. This was also the launch of a "new" product. In the age of politics, , which is a great achievement. So the original model was saved as DF-2, and DF-3 to DF-5 were continuously developed. As for the DF-1, it doesn't matter whether it has it or not. The "new product" model can only move forward and not look back. This also leaves some suspense for future generations to search for.

The Great Wall camera is actually a very simple camera. The shutter is a tipping bucket type, which vibrates very much. The speed is only a simple 5th gear. The viewfinder has no split image and is very dark. It is said that the factory later developed a split image screen, but it was not integrated into it. The product is no longer produced. The lens has a structure of 4 elements in 3 groups, but the workmanship is very rough. The lens is coated with a single layer of blue film. There is no aperture linkage mechanism between the lens and the camera body, so the aperture needs to be fully opened when taking pictures, and the aperture needs to be reduced to the preset aperture when exposing. It is very inconvenient to use and easy to travel. In addition to being able to shoot 6X6 and 645, this camera later developed a 135 attachment and can also shoot 135 film. In fact, the DF camera developed by Beizhao Factory in the 1970s can be said to be relatively successful. Although the Great Wall DF camera was only an imitation of a Japanese camera in the 1930s, our country's production capacity at that time was only at this level. The advantage of this type of camera is that it is simple and less prone to failure. Compared with the many "problem" cameras produced by other camera manufacturers at that time, although Beizhao Factory has a low starting point, it can be said to be wise and calm!

I have been exposed to this kind of camera since 1994. Before that, I first came into contact with the matching lens (90/3.5) of this camera. Because I have been living in a remote and small city, it seems that we have not sold a few of these cameras here, and very few people own them. Before the 1990s, I had only seen introductions to this kind of camera in "Popular Photography". It still had a sense of mystery and longing for me, but I had never had the chance to meet it. Later, I first saw the matching F90/3.5 lens. This was because the manufacturer had accumulated a lot of matching lenses after the DF series cameras were discontinued in the late 1980s (now it seems that they may be substandard products), so some smart people ( I forgot who it was, maybe it was Beijing Wenbo) who designed an adapter to transfer the lens to the 135 camera. According to the popularity of cameras at that time, there were two interfaces (PK, MD). A photographer in Fuxin spent 90 yuan to buy a 90mm medium-focus lens that was attached to a Seagull DF camera. He also took a video and showed it to me. My first impression is that the lens and adapter are rough, and the photos are nothing special due to the way they were taken and developed. The most important thing was that I had been exposed to a lot of Russian equipment at that time, and I admired the Russian 85/2 so much that I no longer cared about such rough things.

In the summer of 1994, I had the opportunity to come into contact with the Great Wall DF-2 camera. There was a DF-2 in poor condition at a stall in Shenyang Kaiming Market. Although the stall owner was familiar with it, he still refused to sell it for 180 yuan less. At that time, I was obsessed with domestically produced double reverses. As long as they were not available, I would buy them no matter how much money I saw. Although the Great Wall DF is not a dual camera but a SLR, it was included in my collection, so I bought it. When I got home, I wiped and played with it and I didn't like it. Firstly, this one is too old, and secondly, the camera is too rough. Alas, let’s just save some samples! It wasn't until 2000 that I got all four of them, DF-2 to DF-5. It's right next to me on my bookcase, but I still don't like it. Too simple and too rough! The capabilities of Beizhao Factory are nothing more than this! It would be great if the later models could make more changes in the specifications, such as producing matching lenses with other focal lengths, allowing the lens aperture and shutter to be linked, and the shutter speed to be a few more stops. . .


Since 916 has a special article introducing various indicators, I won’t go into details here. Just talk about the features:

Advantages: The shutter is not easy to malfunction; the lens is 4 elements in 3 groups, which is the best among domestic ordinary 120 cameras. The header (M39X1) can be directly connected to the amplifier and used as an amplifier head.

Disadvantages: The viewfinder is dark, the shutter shakes loudly, there are no other lenses that can be directly replaced, the aperture is not linked, and it is easy to make mistakes during shooting.