CHINON CP-7m: UNIQUE MULTI-MODE SLR

MANUFACTURER S SPECIFICATIONS: Chlnon Cp-7m 35mm motorized multiprogram single lens reflex camera. Body No. 342032. LENS: 50mm f/1.4 Auto Chlnon in interchangeable universal К bayonet mount. SHUTTER: Electronically controlled Copal vertical travel metal blade with speeds from 8 sec. (15 sec. In AE mode) to V2aoo sec. plus B. VIEWFINDER: Non-interchangeable eye-level prism, central split-image rangefinder, micro-prism collar, full focus screen; digitally lit LEDs indicate program in use, camera-selected shutter speeds, under/ verexposure warnings plus flash ready and confirmation signals. EXPOSURE SYSTEM: Single silicon photodiode (SPD) atop the pentaprism provides through-lens (TTL), centerweighted metering. Manually selected normal, high and low speed autoexposure programs, aperture priority autoexposure, metered manual, autoexposure compensation, ±4 EV In 1/2 stop increments. Metering range EV1 to 20 at ISO/ASA 100 with f/1.4 lens, DX and manual film speed settings from ISO/ASA to 5000. FLASH: Two-pin hot shoe dedicated flash provides flash ready and autoexposure confirmation signals; sync at 1/100 sec. with dedicated flash, Vgg sec. or less for non-dedicated units and manual modes. OTHER FEATURES: Multiple-exposure provision, shutter lock, cancellable variable delay electronic selftimer and intervalometer, built-in contoured handgrip, single and continuous film advance, exposure mode reset button, LCD readout screen program chart, auto-wind and rewind, AE memory lock, backup memory condenser, provision for data back. BATTERIES: 4 AA cells (provided) or 1 2CR5 lithium cell (not provided). PRICE: $616 with 50mm f/1.4 Auto Chlnon, $470 body only.

Ever since the introduction of the Canon T-70 with full electronic control, camera designers have been challenged to create cameras that are electronically advanced without seeming to be threatening to photographers who are computer novices. Chinon's response is the new CP-7m, a functional, stylish, medium-priced SLR with a fetching combination of multi-mode automiation, manual capabilities, plus a distinctively designed major control switch.

The CP-7m bears little resemblance to its most recent predecessor, the Chinon CP-6, and indeed, is so different that there’s no reason to compare the two. Most knobs and dials have been replaced by innovative switches, buttons and a large LCD readout screen. There is a unique multi-mode toggles switch—when you press a corner, all information needed for that mode will appear on the LCD screen in the same physical position as on the switch (more about this later). Such features help to make the CP-7m “user-friendly."

At first look the CP-7m seemed a tad clunky, with its largish rubberized grip and side-heavy feel, but it proved to be much more comfortable and convenient than expected.

Turn the camera upside down, open the battery compartment, and prepare yourself for a bona-fide first: Although the CP-7m can use four conventional AA cells, it also is operable on on one 3-volt lithium battery, the first motorized 35mm SLR with this feature. The lithium advantages—lower temperature tolerance and longer shelf life (five to ten years)— should not be overlooked by those who store their cameras unused for long periods of time (although the battery should be removed and stored separately if the camera isn’t going to be used for more than a month or two.

The power switch, a three-position ring around the electro-magnetic shutter release, is on a slant towards the forward section of the rubberized handgrip. Although the grip looks awkward to hold, the shutter release is within convenient, comfortable reach. Setting the control ring to L locks the shutter release. Turn the ring to S (singleframe advance) or C (continuous film advance at two fps) and the LCD screen to the left of the prism on the top plate comes to life, displaying mode indication, frame number, and an automitically set film speed plus DX indication.

On the CP-7m's right top deck is a touchsetting mode panel. It almost looks like an LCD screen but is realy a four-way toggle-switch. To set the camera's exposure mode, press the corner of the panel marked with the appropriate letter. A selects aperture-preferred automatic, В provides bulb, M is manual, and the P setting offers achoice of three program modes. The panel clicks each time you press it, and the letter you press appears in the LCD screen at the same position as on the switch.

One press at P and you're in normal program. A second press at P and you are in the high-speed action program. The word ACTION appears next to the P mode indication on the LCD panel. Press P a third time and the camera shifts to the smaller aperture, slower shutter speed creative program mode, which maximizes depth of field. The word CREATIVE now appears next to the P. In all these modes, the vertical scale at the left side of the finer picture area lit from the rear by LEDs will show the shutter speed and exposure mode: P (standard program), PA (action program), PC (creative program) in green, A in red for aperture-preferred autoexposure. The shutter speed numerals are green down to '/во sec. Below this to one sec., speeds are in yellow to indicate that you should use some support to prevent camera shake. There is no finder indication that your lens may be set to an aperture other than the green-coded minimum aperture ' setting necessary for program exposure. But even if it’s not, you’ll still get the proper exposure, though the program will be limited to apertures equal to or wider than the one you've set.

The lack of an aperture scale or indication in the viewfinder or on the LCD screen is understandable, if regrettable, since Chinon cameras use widely available K-mount lenses, which are not keyed to transmit aperture information into the camera. K-mount lenses can be had from many independen manufacturers, which adds considerable flexibility for the owner when buying lenses. (Using the K-compatible Ricoh KR mount would have provided aperture readability but that is a Ricoh patent and may not have been available to Chinon.)

Aperture-preferred autoexposure selection is predictable: press the A corner, turn the lens to the aperture you want, and the camera will set the proper shutter speed.

For manual exposure control, press M on the multi-mode panel. Slight pressure on the shutter release now turns on the viewfinder display and a red M appears in the viewfinder scale. The proper exposure shutter speed in the finder will shine steadily. You can follow the suggested exposure or either press the up/down control to the left ofthe shutter button or change the aperture until you reach the exposure you wish. You can, of course, bracket your exposure manually in this manner, a flexible and convenient form of manual exposure control.

Autoexposure correction to handle such things as backlight is available, but the system is not for the fumbie-fingered. Suppose you want to alter your exposure in the program mode while shooting with Dx-coded film. First, press the ISO/EV button, adjacent to the LCD screen. An 0.0 will appear at the bottom of the screen. While pressing the ISO/EV button, you must press the up/down button with your free hand. These digital calisthenics will let you set autoexposure compensation ± stops in V2 stop increments.
For autoexposure compensation with non-DX coded film, just change the ISO/ASA by pressing the same buttons.

The CP-7m, unlike most DX-capable cameras, automatically sets the film speed to that of the last roll in the camera when you use a non-DX coded roll. Most DX-capable cameras available will automatically default to the ISO/ASA 100 setting.

The self-timer is unique. In any mode except B, press the self-timer button (adjacent to the screen). The screen shows the selftime duration as ten sec. You can change the self-timer delay, however, by pressing the up/down control. The self-timer delay can be set from one sec. to 60 sec. in one second intervals and one min. to 90 min. in one minute intervals. You can take interval pictures automatically with a locking cable release. Set the self-timer to the interal you want, press the cable release and lock it. The camera will automatically expose at the preset intervals until the unlock the cable release. You can cancel the self-timer in midcountdown by pressing either the mode reset button (located to the right of the multimode panel and easier to push if you have fingernails) or the ISO/EV button. On B, with the same controls, you can make time exposures up to 90 min.

You can produce an unlimited number of exposures on the same frame by pushing the M.E. (multiple-exposure) switch, found on the top plate just to the right of the prism. Remember to turn the switch off, or you'll end up exposing indefinitely on one frame. However, to remind you that the multiple exposure control is operating, the frame counter on the LCD panel blinks for 12 sec. after each exposure.

Using the AE lock, located on the left side of the lens mount, is slighly cumbersome. In A mode, focus on your subject, press the Ae lock and push the shutter release button halfway. Your metered exposure is now locked in. you are free to move the camera around and recompose, but don't take your finger off the AE lock button. If you do, the AE lock is off. We would have preferred a locking switch on this control, which could leave your left hand free. Nevertheless, the AE lock feature will be welcome'in such instances as making closeup readings in backlit situations.

Instead of incorporating a separate, factory-only changeable lithium cell, found in many other SLRs, the CP-7m has a unique condenser for memory backup. The condenser stores frame number, film speed, exposure mode, EV and shutter speed for up to five hours after the main batteries are removed. This is most useful when changing the main batteries.

Autoloading is quick and easy. Place the cartridge in the film chamber, pull the leader across the film plane until its end coincides with a yellow mark to the right of the take-up spool, close the back and the camera winds the film to the first frame automatically. When you've finished your roll, slide open the door protecting the rewind button and press. The autorewind will wind film completely into the cartirdge, unlike some other autowind cameras.

During field tests, the CP-7m performed admirably. Its viewfinder provides a focusing image of average brightness and contrast with most of the field visible to eyeglass wearers. While some of its unusual controls require familarization, we found the most frequently used ones are well placed and easy to master. Autowind was the quietest in comparison to other autowind SLRs we’ve tested.

The motor drive provides a true two fps speed in the continuous exposure (C) setting, according to our tests. The shutter release takes only a light touch to activate the LCD information panel but offers just enough resistance when actually shooting to prevent you from accidentally exposing a frame when you are just trying to read the panel’s information.

Overall, how did the Chinon CP-7m make out? We feel Chinon has added a multitude of useful electronics while sacrificing little. The advantages of motor-wind, multi-modes and improved readouts, in our opinion, outweigh the loss of traditional knobs and dials, and are easy to learn. Has Chinon successfully made a user-friendly, computer-controlled camera? We think they have. (January 1987)

