TOPCON PR II TOPCON PRII

　　It was a short-lived model that was released in 1960 with minor changes, and production was discontinued after just over half a year. The most noticeable changes are the addition of automatic aperture and light value, but the basics haven't changed that much. However, a number of small details have changed, including the addition of a film speed indicator at the base of the rewind knob.
　After this model, the shutter was changed to Seikosha's SLV type, and from then on, the last lens shutter model, Unirex, shared the same fate.
　The material of the lens is different from the PR one, and it seems that there is less fogging. The images are sharp and powerful, unlike what you might expect from this camera.
　Accessories are the same as PR. There are two types of conversion lenses: wide-angle and telephoto.The 3.7cm and 9.4cm lenses were carried over from PR, and the 8.5cm lens was newly supplied. Although this camera was the Beseler Topcon A, the word "Beseler" was not engraved on it.
This camera is the minor change version that was launched in 1960. An automatic aperture and light value were attached. This camera's production has been stopped in about a half year. Therefore, there is little production number of units of this camera.
Topcon PR II & TOPCOR AUX. lenses	　This is the PR II and the dedicated conversion lens. The one arriving at the camera is TOPCOR AUX. WIDE-ANGLE LENS 3.7cm F4, and the one on the left is TOPCOR AUX. TELEPHOTO LENS 9.4cm F4. These have been available since the PR era, but the one on the right is TOPCOR AUX. TELEPHOTO LENS 8.5cm F4 was switched around the PR II era. With a 9.4cm lens, there is a strong tendency for the image to become weak in the periphery, so this was corrected and the focal length was reduced to improve the image quality to a level that can be clearly used.
　Each of these conversion lenses had its own lens hood, but since the aperture is large, when attached, the camera looks quite large despite its compact size.