TOPCON
WINK MIRROR

　The world's first lens-shutter single-lens reflex camera with a quick return mirror, released in the late 1960s. The lens is a Topkor 48mm F2, which has been upgraded to a Gauss type with 6 elements in 4 groups, but it still has a fixed mount. It has a completely different body type from PR, and is slightly larger (though it still gives the impression of being petite). The dimensions and weight are 132 x 90 x 74 mm and 720 g, respectively.
　The viewfinder field of view is as wide as 96%, and the focus glass has a built-in split-image rangefinder, making it far more user-friendly than the PR II. The shutter button has a large area, and although it is a bit heavy, it is very easy to press. When the cover-like ring that covers the base of the button is turned, it rises until the shutter cannot be pressed and becomes locked. It is characterized by a clicking shutter sound.
This camera was launched in period 1960, and the leaf shutter single-lens reflex camera with the quick return mirror latter at the first of the world. The lens is TOPCOR 48mm F2 and although it upgraded to the Gauss styles of constitution 4 groups 6 elements , but it has fixation mount. The measure and weight are 132×90×74mm and 720g.
Topcon WinkMirror & TOPCOR AUX. lenses	　A dedicated conversion lens is also available for the wink mirror. The one attached to the camera is TOPCOR AUX. TELEPHOTO LENS 80mm F4, and the one on the left is TOPCOR AUX. WIDE-ANGLE LENS 35mm F4. Both are newly designed and the mounting screw diameter is different from that for the PR series, so they are not compatible.
　Even so, the aperture of the telephoto lens is huge. Since this filter has a diameter of 77mm, the original lens hood has a wider shape, making it so large that the camera body is hidden when viewed from the front with the hood attached.
　On the other hand, wide-angle lenses have a narrower aperture, so you won't feel any discomfort when wearing them.
　The wink mirror is a small and lightweight camera, but the conversion lens feels like a block of glass and is very large and heavy, making it cumbersome to carry around. Lenses with a 49mm filter diameter can be used with any camera, but the image quality will inevitably be inferior to lenses with interchangeable groups.