TOPCON WINK MIRROR S
TOPCON WINK MIRROR S

　The EE single-lens reflex camera was released in 1963 at almost the same time as the RE Super. It was the first lens-shutter single-lens reflex camera that made all lens groups replaceable. The lens mount developed here, the UV mount, would be inherited without changing its basic structure until the end of the IC-1 around 1976.
　The standard lens is UV Topcor 53mm F2. Since it was not yet TTL and there was no need to transmit the lens's aperture value to the body, the automatic aperture transmission mechanism required for TTL aperture metering such as RE Autotop Call was not incorporated, but it was soon discovered that this was the cause of failure. Became.
　The exposure meter is an external metering type using a selenium photovoltaic battery, and is an automatic shutter speed priority type that presses the meter needle as you press down on the shutter, transmitting the amount of aperture to the lens according to that position, and of course can also be used manually. There is.
Topcon Wink Mirror S & UV Topcor lenses

　Two interchangeable lenses were released at the same time: UV Topcor 35mm F3.5 and 100mm F4. The following year, around the time of Uni, 135mm and 200mm were added. However, with a telephoto lens, the error between the exposure meter's metering range and what is actually reflected on the lens is too large, so you have to make a lot of correction, so it is more accurate to use manual mode by removing Auto and using a separate spot meter. become.
　By the way, a feature of the UV top call from the Wink Mirror S era was the shape of the lever used to release the lens mount, with a crescent-shaped tip protruding, whereas for later lenses from the UNI era, this lever was trapezoidal. It's flat so you can see it at a glance.
Topcon Wink Mirror S prototype	　The Wink Mirror S has a square body and looks rugged at first glance, but there are many aspects of it that seem to be poor due to cost reductions. Initially, as shown in the leaflet for foreign countries on the left, the design was similar to VEB Pentacon's Pentina with both shoulders dropped, but the design was a little too unusual, so the sales model was changed to an average shape except for the square shape.
　Although it has the Wink Mirror name, the body parts are not compatible with the previous model, and the size of the body die-cast frame is also larger. Nikon's lens-shutter SLR cameras Nikorex 35 and Nikon 35II have similar angular designs, but the Wink Mirror S looks sharper than Nikon's Nikorex, which uses a polo mirror and has a fixed lens. There is no doubt that Topcon's camera was more advanced from a mechanical standpoint.