TOPCON UNIREX EE
TOPCON UNIREX EE

　This is an export-only model that debuted in 1972, and is a low-priced version of Unirex without the mirror spot meter. Therefore, the A/S switching lever that was installed at the base of the rewind lever has been removed, resulting in a cleaner design. In other words, it was empty, so perhaps to fill it up, the letters "EE" were engraved here. The winding lever has also been changed, using the same plastic finger rest as the later IC-1 Auto. The accessory shoe is also the same as the IC-1 with a vertical cutout in the middle. It is unknown whether it was intended for the later hot shoe.
　The standard lens has also been downgraded to 50mm F2.8. This lens was also produced as HI Topkol during the IC-1 era.
　In other respects, it is no different from Unirex, but this alone makes it feel much cheaper. After all, it seems that if the area around the lens barrel becomes black, the sense of luxury disappears.
　As early as the 1970s, only Topcon and Kowa continued to produce 35mm lens-shutter SLR cameras, and Mamiya, which had been producing them until relatively late, had already withdrawn. Since all of the models were originally positioned as introductory models, it seemed natural that they would be priced cheaply, but in reality, quick-return type single-lens shutter cameras are mechanically very complex, and from the manufacturer's point of view, It didn't have much flavor. It would be great if it still sold well, but by this time a variety of cheap and reliable focal plane SLR cameras, including the Petri, had already appeared, and there was no longer any need to go out of your way to buy a lens-shutter camera. . Topcon and Kowa struggled under these circumstances, but Seikosha, the shutter unit manufacturer, was no longer profitable, and they finally decided to discontinue production of the Seikosha SLV. As a result, using the remaining units that had already been produced, Topcon sold the Unirex EE, and Kowa sold the UW190 with a fixed ultra-wide-angle lens, completely ending the history of 35mm lens-shutter SLR cameras. It was. After this, Kowa withdrew from 35mm cameras, and Topcon created the IC-1 Auto with an electronic focal plane shutter unit, extending the life of the UV mount for a while longer.
TOPCON did not discard the lens shutter single-lens reflex camera until the last. But Seikosha that was producing the shutter evacuated. Therefore TOPCON set a focal plain shutter to UNIREX. This way IC-1Auto was completed. TOPCON never did not leave an important UV mount user to his face in the lurch.