TOPCON RE300
Black Body
TOPCON RE300
Black Finished

　As mentioned above, RE300 was only sold in black body type in Japan. Of course, there is no mechanical difference from the chrome body. The standard lens was the RE Topkor 55mm F1.7, which had been used since the RE200, and the interchangeable lenses released around this time were called the N series, which stands for New. RE Zoom Topcor 35-100mm F3.5-4.3 has been newly added. Although it was designed by Tokyo Kogaku, it was manufactured by subcontractor Shima Kogaku, the predecessor of Seema, which later produced Shimco.
　The winder's winding speed is as fast as 0.3 seconds, but it is also quite noisy. Although it is only for single-frame winding, the winding speed is so fast that you won't feel any discomfort even if you press the shutter button continuously. Although many plastic parts are used as a whole, when you put the winder on and hold it in your hand, it feels surprisingly sturdy. It's neither too heavy nor too light, and feels just right to hold.
　There is no shutter button on the winder's grip, so you have to place your middle finger on the grip and use your index finger to press the normal shutter button on the body, which may be confusing at first. Therefore, only your ring finger and little finger grip the grip from the sides, but since you hold it with your middle finger from above, you can hold the camera surprisingly stable.
　At the time this camera was released, all companies were selling relatively inexpensive, yet high-quality TTL-AE models that could be equipped with a winder. Therefore, although this camera could be equipped with a winder, it did not include an automatic exposure mechanism, and it clearly felt like it was behind the times. However, once I started using it, it became one of my personal favorite cameras due to its light and simple operation. The performance of the lens generally seems to have deteriorated compared to the RE Auto Topcor, and especially when shooting against the light, ghosting and flare occur, which is hard to believe for a lens designed in the late 1970s. However, if you are aware of these quirks and use it, you will be able to see the same rich gradation as the previous Topcor.
　Anyway, with this model Topcon ended domestic sales of 35mm cameras (production ended in 1980, sales ended in 1981).
This camera is the minor change model of the Topcon RE200 that launched in 1978. It is able to attach the Auto winder II. The standard lens is the RE Topcor 55mmf1.7 and the interchangeable lens was called the Topcor N series. The meaning is not the "NAVY". It means "NEW". Sometimes, we can find the thing that the EXAKTA name was attached.