TOPCON IC-1 AUTO
TOPCON IC-1 AUTO

　An AE camera with an electronically controlled shutter mechanism released in 1974. Since Seikosha has discontinued production of lens shutters, this camera inherits the design of Unirex, but has undergone major modifications to create a focal plane, and uses a UV mount.
　Originally, a copulse square would have been used, but due to space constraints, this was not possible, so a horizontally running cloth curtain shutter made in-house was used. However, the opening and closing of the curtain is electronically controlled. Even though it has an electronic shutter, for some reason this camera uses shutter-priority AE, just like previous LS cameras. This is a strange story when you think about it, and you start to wonder what the electronic control is for. That being said, the UV mount lens is from Wink Mirror S ~ Unirex, a shutter-priority AE system, so it can't be helped, but I think it would have been better to use a mechanical shutter in that case. Was space an issue?
　The standard lens is the HI Topkor 50mm F2, which is basically the same as the UV Topkor 50mm F2 for Unirex. However, some lenses with the HI notation have a wider rear lens aperture than previous UV mount lenses, and cannot be used with older lens-shutter cameras. The automatic transmission mechanism for the aperture value of interchangeable lenses is not added as it is a UV mount, and must be set manually. Uni and Unirex have a scale engraved on the bottom of the same ring that is directly connected to the ASA sensitivity setting knob next to the shutter dial on the mount, but the IC-1 has a separate aperture setting dial. It is installed in the position of the self-timer on regular cameras. On the other hand, the "V (self-timer),
　The light metering system is no longer dual spot/average metering like Unirex, but instead uses TTL aperture average metering with a CdS placed next to the viewfinder.
　The size of the camera is almost the same as the Unirex, and if you look at other companies' cameras, it's very close to the Pentax SP. The texture in my hand is heavier and more precise than the Unirex. Perhaps due to this, the price setting for the IC-1 has increased significantly from 33,500 yen for Unirex to 46,500 yen. However, production of the RE-2 had long since discontinued by this time, and it seems that Tokyo Kogaku wanted to position it as an intermediate model between an intermediate model and a beginner model. However, it was priced at one of the lowest prices among other SLR cameras at the time.
　The Topcon IC-1 Auto is a camera that gives the impression that even though Seikosha discontinued production of lens shutters, they did not abandon the users who had been using UV mounts for many years and tried to somehow repay their kindness.
This is the AE camera named TOPCON IC-1 AUTO that has the electric method shutter system of launched in 1974. It takes over the design of UNIREX and remodel and turned focal plain shutter. But the UV mount is used. Topcon did not leave the UV mount lens user to his fate in the lurch.