TOPCON New IC-1 AUTO
TOPCON New IC-1 AUTO

　Minor change model released in 1976. Although the name remains IC-1, it is generally referred to as "New IC-1" to avoid confusion. The changes were that the accessory shoe without electrical contacts became a hot shoe, a battery check function for the exposure meter was added, and the standard lens was upgraded to HI Topcor 55mm F1.8. This is the case. Additionally, the new IC-1 has the serial number engraved on the back of the hot shoe pedestal (above the viewfinder eyepiece), whereas the previous model had it engraved next to the rewind crank. There were other minor changes, but the RE200 was released soon after, so it completely disappeared in 1978. However, only the interchangeable lenses remained in the catalog for some time after that.
　Interestingly, in the era of the new IC-1, in addition to the 55mm F1.8, the older 50mm F2 was also sold side by side in Japan, but overseas, the 50mm F2, which has the same roots as Unirex EE's standard lens, was sold alongside the 55mm F1.8. A .8 version was also sold. The one in the image is the HI TOPCOR 50mm F2.8. The design of the lens barrel does not use the machined helicoid ring that follows the Unilex era of the old IC-1, but uses anti-slip rubber knurling similar to the Super DM. This is also the case with the 55mm F1.8, and the F2.8 lens probably debuted with the New IC-1. However, although it is a dark lens, it does not use the currently popular thin tube commonly known as the so-called pancake lens.
　Regardless, although this camera is a low-priced model, it is a well-made and beautiful camera. However, like lens-shutter cameras up to Unirex, the shutter speed was still only up to 1/500 seconds even in the mid-1970s, and it can't help but feel a little outdated. Coupled with the fact that there is no intermediate speed setting, it would be fair to say that it is unclear why the electronically controlled shutter was used. Perhaps due to such a modest impression, second-hand prices are currently quite low, but the shutter and exposure meter of this camera are surprisingly durable, so it has survived better than other companies' SLRs that used electronic shutters from the early days of the same era. The rate of occurrence is high.