For decades Praktica had used the 42mm screw mount for their lenses. Finally they realised the shortcomings of this system and devised their own bayonet mount with the relaying of information being largely electronic.

With the new lens mount Praktica gave the photographer a new range of lenses. These come from Pantacon and allegedly Sigma, the major Japanese company.

The design of the body is the most striking feature of the new camera. Finished in a professional-looking black it is divided into sections - the best description I can proffer is that it is similar to a grenade: perhaps not the most fortunate analogy.

Metering is by means of an ultra high speed Gallium Arsenide Phosphorous cell. This is switched on by a first pressure on the shutter release button, which is at the right end of the top plate and threaded to accept a cable release.

Once the metering circuit is activated, and for as long as the pressure is maintained an LED in the viewfinder lights beside a scale of the shutter speeds. These are shown to the right of the screen. At the bottom the aperture set on the lens is displayed, this is by reflection via a 'Judas Window’.

In the manual mode shutter speeds from 1-1/1000 sec can be selected on the conventionally placed dial on the top plate. Set this control to auto and the range of speeds available will extend to 40 seconds. In addition there is a B setting on this dial and a lightning symbol which gives the flash synch speed of 1 /90sec.

At the left hand end of the top plate the re-wind lever folds into its knob. This is surrounded by the exposure
compensation control for use in the auto mode, allowing + or - one or two stops variance from the reading of the meter. There is also an exposure memory lock so even in the auto mode this camera is a sophisticated light measuring machine.

The hot-shoe has no additional contacts and there is no dedicated flash system available for this camera. There is also a P/C socket for another flash gun. Rather unusually, but sensibly, the two circuits are not interlinked and can be operated together. It is far more usual for the use of one outlet to switch the other off.

On the right side of the lens mount is the depth of field preview which must be held while in use. Very close to this (perhaps a little too close) is the mechanical self timer for delayed action shots. This has a run of around 10 seconds and once set is fired by pressing a small button beneath the lever.

The B200 represents a new departure for Praktica and as such there are bound to be a few teething troubles. These all seem to be resolved now and the cameras available are giving first class results. A whole system is being built around it piece by piece. There is already a two frame per second autowinder available.

Lenses are becoming available - fixed focal length only at present but there are zooms on the way. The camera feels a little cluttered at first but the lay-out soon becomes familiar and then it handles well.

The results from the 50mm f/1.8 lens are quite good enough but without that edge of some of the dearer Japanese cameras. Despite one or two minor reservations this is still a fine camera.
