Last August I had a chance to use the Nikon N8008 for the first time, alternating it on a fashion shoot with my trusty Nikon FE. Now, I wasn't interested in the N8008’s fine, fast auto-focus or any of its auto-ex-posure modes—I'm used to getting my exposures from a light meter, and frankly I wasn’t about to experiment with something new during a job. But one thing I liked about the N8008— and the reason I used it—is how well it adapts to my equipment and the way I work. The other big feature and the one I got to test pretty well was its built-in two-speed motor drive.

The good old FE has a slap-on motor drive/handle accessory which I've used for years, and which allowed me to overcome my habit of taking my eye away from the viewfinder when I advanced the film. But what was once a pricey pro option is now standard issue to the interested amateur, and the advantages and disadvantages of the different film advance systems came pretty clear as I worked with the two cameras. To use an automotive metaphor, if the FE is as tough and useful as a Jeep, the N8008 has the stylish feel of a Ferrari To prefer one over the other depends on where you're going and how you want to get there.

For starters, each had a different psychological effect on my models. The N8008 is a self-contained small camera and neither of the models, Dan-iela of Wilhelmina and Michael Fleintz of Gilla Roos, paid much attention to it while getting ready for the first shot. "That camera's kind of cute,” Dan-iela said. "But you're not going to use it, are you?" The FE, without its motor drive, looks even less imposing than the N8008. But once that accessory is slapped on, the FE seems to double in size and stature. Suddenly it is an imposing, professional piece of equipment.

I decided to use it for the first shot, set at f/4 at Vi 25 second, a picture of Michael running up the studio wall as a bemused Daniela stands by. The trick was to capture the moment when Michael seemed to be standing on the wall, like Fred Astaire in Royal Wedding, at an almost perpendicular angle to Daniela. His actual hang time was about half a second. He took a running start and I started shooting. First he took two steps straight up the wall, hung for that fraction of a second, then turned and stepped down.

Although I was using the FE in its continuous motor drive mode—which fired as long as the button was pressed—its top speed of 2.5 fps didn't feel right. Since it does not take long to run up a wall, I felt I was one frame behind what he was doing. It seemed that the action was happening between snaps.

I switched to the N8008 in the Manual mode for its faster drive of 3.3 fps. This gave me close to a full extra frame during the same span of time. When I saw the contact sheets I realized that that extra frame was what it took to capture Michael defying gravity. Of course I was trying to manufacture what Cartier-Bresson called the "decisive moment.” The whole two-day shoot was, in fact, a continuous series of situations where I was trying to inspire the models to create one moment after another. Without the motor drives there was always the chance that too many of the moments would fall between the frames.

Once you get models "up" for a shot—and Michael was certainly that—you have to go with the resulting explosion of energy and shoot away. There's no time to waste. I changed cameras as Michael was gearing up for another dash up the wall and, in my haste, forgot that the FE’s motor drive button requires more pressure than the N8008.1 absent mindedly rested my finger on the FE’s button and nothing happened. But when I grabbed for the N8008 three frames fired off as I raised it to my eye. In fact, that happened three times in a row

The next location was the rooftop of a penthouse belonging to some friends. Remember, it was August and plenty hot up there. I decided to conserve some energy and use the lighter weight N8008 for most of the work. (It weighs in at about two pounds, one pound less than the accessorized FE.) One thing that did not occur to me was the role played by the motor drive's sound.

The N8008 makes a quiet, purring sound, while the FE buzzes and snaps like a locust. And although / heard the N8008 going off, neither Dan-iela nor Michael, about 12 feet away, knew when the shutter clicked. That sound is very important to models; it's the only way they can tell if the photog-I rapher approves of their action. As quiet as the N8008 is, its sound will carry in a hushed studio. Up on the roof, no one could hear it. I went to the FE, switched on the "continuous" mode and went to work

Even then I had to make some adjustments. Daniela told me I was going too fast. "If the clicks were coming about half as fast I'd be able to give each movement more thought." A fashion photographer has to be a good director, which means knowing when to take direction from a model. I switched to the single frame mode, which fired the shutter once at each touch of the button.

Daniela. barefoot and dressed in evening clothes, reminded me of a contessa with her elegent poise. Unfortunately the rooftop was getting hotter and hotter. The next wardrobe change was for a andmade wool sweaier, and by then the location had become too hot. But Daniela was a trouper! And her idea for modeling the sweater was to lie on the roof and move her long arms. How long could she take it? Time to go to the fast N8008.

Talk about creating a moment. I told her she didn't have to hear the camera, just listen to me yell about how great she looked She though! that was pretty funny, and the resulting laugh made for a great series, all done in less than three seconds.

The models weren't the only ones who needed to hear the motor drive. I had never shot anyone doing acrobatics before, so when Michael began a series of cartwheels with the Empire State Building and the Metropolitan Life Insurance clock tower in the distance I wanted to be sure of getting a series of frames that would cin-ematically capture each of his movements.

My guess was that the faster motor drive would be the better one for this situation; but as it was only a guess I decided to use both cameras at full speed. Turns out that was the right move. At 3.3 fps one frame seemed to bleed into the next. There was action but no definition from frame to frame. At 2.5 fps each movement was distinct, moving logically from one to the other.

Compared to the cartwheels, Michael's last bit of rooftop acrobatics—walking across a ladder like a tightrope—was done in slow motion. He took it one step at a time, waving his arms to keep his balance. Here all I wanted the MD to do was advance the film. Although I was picking my shots of Michael's tightrope-ladder walk— one shot every four or five seconds—I couldn't afford to break my own concentration, something that happened too often when I manually advanced film. In this situation I didn't even want to be distracted by the loud clank of the FE. The quieter N8008 also enabled me to turn around to where Daniela was having her hair done to shoot a few behind-the-scenes shots. Something told her she was being watched, as she looked up and made a face that's both funny and sexy.

The first time I ever used a ’Лоо second exposure occurred after we broke for lunch and went inside the penthouse The telephone rang. Michael answered it, turned and handed the reciever to my friend. The gesture, to my eye, looked balletic; certainly worth repeating, only much faster. If y500 second seems fast, how about У500 second 3.3 times in one second, which the N8008 allowed me to do.

Michael repeated the move several times when a wonderful accident happened He started moving so quickly that he forgot about the phone, yanking it off the table. I was able to freeze the telephone before it hit the floor and catch Michael's attempt to grab it.

Thanks to an instinctive bit of acting by Daniela, our shoot the next day was a success similar, in a way, to the dropping telephone. I was hoping for something to happen once I outlined my idea to the two models. I had Michael climb onto Gramercy Park's iron fence right behind Daniela, hoping again for that magic moment. Because I wanted them to change their pose for each shot, I used the FE at the single-shot setting so they could hear me working.

Well, I shot and shot and nothing happened. (It’s pretty easy to tell when nothing's going on.) Daniela suggested something different. “How about if I do something like this..." She looked up at the sky and threw her head back toward Michael with one finger extended to him. He let go of the fence and tried to touch her finger with both of his hands. At ’/125 second his legs, which he scissor-kicked to keep his balance, went blurry; a wonderfully surreal instant.

“We got it," Michael said moments later "I could tell by the sound of the motor drive.” —MARTIN GARDLIN

