Iloca AUT-O-MATIC
Iloca AUT-O-MATIC
Iloca AUT-O-MATIC
This is one of the last of the Iloca cameras, the Iloca AUT-O-Matic.  It is a development of the Rapid III model and shares the same features, including built-in exposure meter and built-in rangefinder.  It does, however, differ in a few ways.  Firstly, the dial for setting the ASA film speed has been moved to the camera's base.  Secondly, the camera's exposure setting is now adjusted using the small dial on the lower front of the camera which is coupled to the in-built lightmeter.  Turning the dial changes the aperture until the two meter needles are aligned (note that the meter on this camera has no scales at all).  Once set, the coupled shutter/aperture combinations are retained - that is, increasing the shutter speed via the shutter speed ring results in a corresponding decrease in aperture.  Hence the 'Automatic' aspect of this camera, and quite a clever approach to setting exposures. This feature is also part of the Iloca Electric design.

This particular camera has a 50mm F2.8 Cassarit lens which is capable of producing quite sharp images.  The model was also available with a Rodenstock Ysarex F2.8 50mm lens.

The camera has a good rangefinder and the shutter button is on the front panel similar to the Rapid III.  A separate opening for a cable release is located on the top panel.  Like most Ilocas, this camera is quite pleasant to hold and has a nice, solid feel to it, although it does feel a little bit more bulky than some of the previous models.  However, this does not detract from the overall handling and feel.

This model is in many ways the culmination of all of the Iloca fixed lens rangefinder models, and it illustrates Iloca 's quest to develop a quality camera with a degree of automation to make life easier for the photographer.  You can see Iloca's plan unfolding with this model which, together with the more sophisticated Iloca Electric, was headed towards the concept of the Iloca auto-electric, a camera intended to offer photographers a high level of automation in its day.

One tip for opening the back on these cameras - turn the dial marked 'R' on the base plate fully in the direction of the arrow.  This causes the rewind knob on the top plate to pop out from its housing.  Pull this knob upwards to its full extension while holding the dial marked ‘R’ fully in the direction of the arrow (the knob should extend about 2 cms above the top plate).  Release pressure on the bottom dial then slowly twist the knob on the top plate clockwise until the springloaded mechanism releases the back. The back on these models is not symmetrical and only fits one way.  Replacing the back is generally the reverse of the above procedure.  One thing is for certain - the back is never going to fall off this camera by accident!!
In Summary
A quality camera which was the culmination of Iloca's fixed lens models.  This camera is capable of producing nice sharp images and, like its earlier counterparts, seems to be robust, well built and has a nice feel.  This model is most likely the last of the fixed lens cameras produced by Iloca.