Iloca Quick
Iloca Quick
Iloca Quick
The Iloca Quick Series of cameras was introduced around 1952.  These cameras offered buyers a compact and capable camera for its day, which was straightforward to operate.  There were several different Quick models, and plenty of different versions within each model.  However they all had one thing in common - every Quick model had film advance and rewind knobs on the top plate, as opposed to the 'rapid' advance lever found on the Rapid models.  Beyond that, some had shutter buttons on the lens while others had the shutter button on the top plate (as is the case with the Iloca Quick shown).  Some (but not all) sported an accessory shoe located in various positions on the top plate.  Quick models were also available with various lens and shutter configurations.

The Quick range introduced several improvements over earlier models, notably removable camera backs and a new film transport mechanism.  These developments greatly improved film loading and provided owners with a more reliable camera compared with the earlier Iloca I / Ia and II / IIa models.

The Quick range continued for quite some time, despite the introduction of the Rapid models.  Although Quick models are generally similar to their Rapid siblings, most Quicks were devoid of at least a few of the more advanced features found on the Rapid models.  Quick cameras were less likely to come with a delayed action (self-timer) device, and although they did have a PC Flash contact, there was no choice of flash settings.  Quick models generally were equipped with a Jlitar F3.5 lens or similar, which was a slightly lower spec than equivalent Rapid models, most of which featured Steinheil lenses.  There seems to be plenty of variety within the Quick range, and it's not surprising to find Quick models that look the same, actually having different specifications on closer examination.

Functionally, the Iloca Quick is quite a compact camera with a nice, robust and uncluttered feel about it.  This particular model Quick has no metering and no rangefinder, although the later Quick–B versions did incorporate an in-built rangefinder.  Although this camera's specification is fairly conventional, to my mind it has an attractive appearance which somehow seems to capture the essence of the 1950's perfectly.  While it's no Leica or Voigtländer, I'm sure that it would have satisfied the needs of many people over the years.

One tip for opening the back on these cameras: Pull the rewind knob upwards to its full extension. Then slowly turn clockwise until the springloaded mechanism releases the back. When replacing the back on earlier models, make sure the red dots on the camera back and the camera body are aligned.
In Summary
A neat little 35mm camera with iconic 1950's appearance.  A relatively simple camera with a robust and well-built feel, and reliable performance.  This camera is capable of producing quite acceptable results given the right conditions.
​