August has been a good month for new cameras. Usually we enter the silly season and not much happens, allowing one to hide in such shade as may be found. Alas, Hervic, the Topcon distributor, did me in this time; just as 1 was ready for a little goofing off in the country, they sent the RE200 and three lenses into the office.

Now the Topcon RE200 is an unusual camera, obviously built to meet the demand of those of you who appreciate the array of beautiful Topcor lenses but don’t feel inclined to shell out for the top camera in Topcon’s (no pun intended) marque, the Super DM. The RE200 is a basic, no nonsense 35mm SLR, and while a few features that we have come to expect on a camera have been omitted, it is in no wise outclassed by cameras several times its price.

So what’s missing?

Well, there is no depth-of-field preview button. No lock on the shutter release, and no shutter speed or aperture display in the finder. The finder screen is of the fixed type, and there is no provision for a drive or auto-winder. In passing 1 would like to express my appreciation to Topcon for doing away with the rangefinder spot in the focusing screen. Instead there is a central microprism focusing aid surrounded by a fine-etched focusing collar. The balance of the screen is fine-etched matte. This is an excellent arrangement even with wide-angle lenses which are reputed to be difficult to focus. Not so with the RE200. You will definitely appreciate the focusing aids that Topcon has provided if you do
depth-of-field preview, I wonder how often that control really gets used by most photographers. In your average run-of-the-mill shooting situation you don’t have time to mess about; you get the shots and worry later. If you are in a more leisurely situation, it’s a simple matter to eyeball the depth-of-field scale on the lens as one does with a rangefinder camera. The simple answer to no shutter lock is don’t arm the shutter until you need it.

Metering with the RE200 is simple; it is a manual TTL meter using a three-range LED display. Take up first pressure on the shutter release and turn either the shutter dial or the aperture ring until the green LED comes on in the center of the tiny panel on the right side of the screen. The green light indicates correct exposure. If a red LED goes on either at the top or bottom of the panel, you are in an over- or underexposure situation. A red LED in either direction indicates a fraction of a stop under or over, providing one of them comes on immediately after the green. I mention this because the RE200’s metering system offers no indication of how much under or over you may actually be. For instance, if the correct aper-ture/shutter speed setting is, say, 1/125 at f/11 and you turn either control too far, you could actually be several stops/ speeds off in your exposure. When applying exposure compensation, first get the green LED to light, then proceed by feeling the detents on either control as you turn. Topcor lenses are, by the way, full and half-stop detented which make for an easy fine-tuning situation.

The meter is on as long as you hold the shutter button half down. Power for the meter’s twin CdS cells is derived from two 1.5-volt silver oxide batteries housed in a swing-open compartment in the baseplate. We hear a lot of talk these days about the newer meter cells, silicon, gallium arsenide, and so forth. The main plug being that CdS cells are supposed to load up—that is, have a memory of the previous exposure and thus render the second shot incorrectly metered. I did a lot of fancy footwork trying to make the RE200’s meter remember by shooting from light to dark fairly quickly. I was unable to see any difference in the Ektachromes thus shot. In other words, for all practical purposes the RE200’s meter does not load up.

There is an etched plus sign above the green LED position and an etched minus sign below it so that you know in which direction you are going with the metering. The meter is center-weighted and very accurate. There is no battery test. If the LEDs fail to light no matter what you do, then your batteries are kaput. Since the meter is always off until you take up first pressure, battery life promises to be very long. If the battery life of the Topcon Super DM is anything to go by (and I tend to leave mine switched on), you can forget your worries on that score.

The film sensitivity range of the RE200 is from ASA 25-1600 and is set by lifting the outer knurled edge of the shutter speed dial and turning until the speed you require appears in its little window. There is also a DIN equivalent window. The shutter speed dial on the RE200 is very large and readily handled, with a rubber (or rubberized) ring around its perimeter. It should be easy to operate with gloves on in the winter.

Film advance is by a single throw of the very comfortable plastic-tipped lever. The throw is 120 degrees with a 20-degree standoff when in use. Film rewind is conventional in that it uses a fold-out crank. This assembly shares function with the pull-up-to-open-the-back mechanism.

The Topcon RE200 is immaculately finished both inside and out. The machining of the film guide rails is as smooth as silk. Multiple exposures using the RE200 are quite feasible using the standard method of taking up the slack with the rewind crank and holding in the rewind button while arming the shutter. Registration is excellent but remember that the additive film counter goes on counting whether the film is advanced or not.

Because the RE200's meter is in continuous function synchro-sunlight shots with the camera are a cinch. You may hot-shoe the gun to the mount atop the pentaprism or connect via the auxiliary 3mm PC socket on the front of the camera. All you should watch out for when executing synchro-sunlight pictures is that you stay within the 1/125 of a second to В range on the shutter speeds. It is then simply a question of arriving at a satisfactory aperture that suits both the metering for the ambient light and the flashgun's shooting range (if using a self-sensing gun) and guide number.

Topcon has retained the Exakta-type lens bayonet mount so the camera remains compatible with all Topcor lenses. The only slight modification is a cosmetic one on the lens release latch.

There are three basic 50/55mm standard lenses for the Topcon RE200. All are automatic diaphragm lenses. The f/1.4 and the f/1.8 Auto GN Top-cors are, as their nomenclature implies, Guide Number lenses. You program the lens with the appropriate guide number for the flash you are using and as you focus, the lens does the rest, opening and closing the diaphragm as you focus. This type of arrangement makes life very easy when using noncomputer flashguns. Believe it or not, they are still made, especially in the more poweiful types. Besides, some of us still like to let rip with a powerful flashbulb now and again!

The 55mm f/1.7 Auto Topcor, which is generally supplied with the RE200, is an excellent optic and has no GN function. It cranks in to a little under two feet and has an aperture scale that runs from f/1.7 down to f/16. The aperture detents are in full and half stops and the focusing moves softly and positively, as do all Topcor lenses. The filter mount is a 52mm screw-in type. Not much else one can say about the f/1.7 55mm Auto Topcor except that it is as sharp as a tack.
The other two lenses I tried with the RE200 were the f/3.5 25mm Auto Topcor, and the f/3.5 135mm Auto Topcor. The 25mm lens I chose out of sentiment since it is one of my all-time favorite wide-angles. The 135mm short tele was requested because I know that most people own a 135mm or at least contemplate owning one. The 25mm f/3.5 Auto Topcor is a wonderful optic. It will crank in to approximately three inches from the front element and, with a bit of cheating on the depth of field from the smaller stops, you can get in even closer. Filters for the 25mm are tiny fellows that bayonet to the rear element of the lens. You may buy a set of them for the lens but it comes with a UV filter already in place since the filter actually forms an integral part of the optical system. Without a filter behind the rear element the 25mm f/3.5 Auto Topcon is not fully corrected at infinity. To tell the truth though, I bought a used 25mm sans filter and swear I couldn't tell the difference, filter or not. The lens seemed perfectly sharp to me. Still, to keep Topcon’s designers happy, keep the (UV) filter in place. If you already own a Topcon and haven’t tried this lens, 1 earnestly entreat you to do so. It's a real beauty.

The 135mm f/3.5 tele is also excellent. You can focus in to just a little under five feet which gives you a full-frame headshot. The lens shade is a telescoping type which slides back down the barrel for capping and stowing the lens in its case.

In the field the Topcon RE200 proved to be no slouch. I shot several rolls of the new Ektachrome 200 with it. I was shooting in tricky lighting under trees with flashes of light reflecting off water. Metering for a nude under these circumstances is quite difficult, but the camera didn’t blow a single frame. Exposure compensation for backlit situations was easy. The camera is quick and well balanced with absolutely no bad habits.

If you are looking for a reasonably priced SLR you should give the RE200 a go. (Suggested list price with 55mm f/1.7 lens is $345.) If you already own a Topcon and are looking for a second body the same advice holds true. It is an excellent, no-nonsense, basic SLR that simply gets on with taking sharp, correctly exposed shots and does not get in the way of your creativity. Anyway, since the U.S. Navy has been using Topcon equipment for years, as have other Government agencies, it says a lot for the standard of quality both in the cameras and the optics. What cannot speak, cannot lie.

—Lief Ericksenn
