I've often been attracted to 1930s cameras that were made from bakelite; perhaps it's because my very first camera was a Kodak Baby Brownie that I bought with my 1949 Christmas money.  Camera designers back then were able to mould shapes that were quite different from the metal-bodied cameras of the time.  As well they had the option of offering cameras with a coloured body.  Many bakelite cameras we see nowadays unfortunately have some damage, usually cracks or chips.  Bakelite was sometimes referred to as 'Breakalite' after someone had experienced dropping one. Recently I acquired a stylish brown 1934 bakelite camera in nice undamaged condition.  When folded its smooth shape makes it hard to recognise as a camera:


In early 1930 Albert Ebner & Company in Stuttgart-Vaihingen, Germany, were manufacturing record players; then late in 1933 they designed and made two folding rollfilm cameras. Their Ebner camera was made in two sizes; both had quite a streamlined shape and were available in either black or brown. The 4.5x6cm model opened from a horizontal position, the 6x9cm model from a vertical position. Both had the winding knob positioned within the body and had viewfinders that, when folded away, added to their streamlined look.



Interestingly, while the 6x9 model used 120 film, the 4.5x6 model used 620 film. I guess that enabled them to make the smaller body less bulky. In 1932 Kodak created the 620 film size, which had a smaller diameter core than 120, for just that purpose.

I thought the actual moulding structure of the 4.5x6 camera to be very well designed. 


 It also included some metal pins that would add strength to the body. The handle mounts unscrew and the handle can be detached for an even smoother profile. You can't miss the Ebner name, it is painted onto the front strut base, moulded into the film chamber and inside the back door.

Both cameras were available with many different lens/shutter combinations. McKeown lists eight for the 4.5x6 and nine for the 6x9. The Ebners were mostly sold in Europe and the 6x9 was advertised in UK in the 1934 edition of the BJA:

 

There was also a shipment to USA; in a 1935 advertisement by Willoughbys, New York, it was described as "the most beautiful practical camera we have ever presented...slick and rounded to drop into the side pocket or purse..."

The Ebner cameras were made only for two years as the company went out of business in 1935. Their camera's styling was so admired that the 6x9 design was later copied by two French manufacturers who made, around 1938, the Pontiac Bakélite and the Gallus Bakélite.

