Cosina has dubbed this the ‘Winking Camera’ because of the rather special system of lens covering it uses. An oblong metal protector hides the lens and front of the viewfinder, as this is turned a slider within it bares the lens, the action looks a little like an eye giving a wink - hence the name.

Cosina are developing this camera and slowly building a mini-system around it. It has its own dedicated flash gun, although any electronic unit using a hot-shoe will work on it, a battery powered winder and an underwater housing.

This is another really compact camera and can easily be stored in a pocket and carried all day without any strain. It has fully programmed exposure, no user control over either aperture or shutter speed, a choice of zone symbols or measuring scale focusing and a simplified lay-out of the few controls.

The top plate houses the re-wind lever, which folds flush at the left-hand end, the hot-shoe, the light action shutter release and the frame counter.

Winding-on is carried out by a serrated thumb wheel at the top back.

To the right of the lens assembly is an aperture scale with ‘Auto’ marked at the bottom, below f/2.8. This scale should only be used for flash work and the auto setting for all normal work. Below the scale is the mechanical self timer which will give a delay of 10 seconds.

Focusing can be carried out by the zone symbols or on a metric scale. When the lens is uncovered a cut-
out window on the top of the lens cover shows the focusing symbols of figures and mountains; this is adjusted by a small lever below the lens which points to positions on a measured scale for more precise work.

The viewfinder has a brightline frame with parallax correction marks for close-up work. Across the bottom are the zone focusing symbols and a pointer which shows the focusing distance of the lens - a useful reminder for those unaccustomed to focusing a lens, or even those used to an SLR who will shoot when the viewfinder image is clear, out of habit.

As the shutter release is pressed, a green light glows in the finder eyepiece to indicate that the battery is live. If the light is so low that a shutter speed of longer than 1/45 of a second will be given a red LED also lights up as a warning that a flash should be used or a tripod fitted to the bush on the base.

This is a tiny camera, even with the winder which advances a frame at a time and has no continuous run facility and the flash fitted. The accessories make it a little more attractive than other cameras in this class and for simple point and shoot work it is first rate.

The results from the Cosinon 35mm f/2.8 lens are sharp and full of punch, the slightly wide angle view gives greater depth of field than a 50mm lens and is ideal for landscape and group work.

This is certainly an attractive camera for those considering this class who do not want to be weighed down with a bag of heavy equipment.
