The name Cosina seems to have taken the photo world by surprise of late. Largely ignored for many years they have recently produced a whole range of models that demand attention.

In their present range of models the CT-3 is the auto only camera. This is a straightforward model with no surprises or complexities in its design - using it should be just a matter of a few minutes’ practice for even the most inexperienced photographer.

The camera is useless without the power of its two 1,5v silver oxide cells which are housed in the baseplate. This drives the electronic shutter at speeds between 8 and 1 /1 OOOsec. To get an exposure the mode selector on the right hand end of the top plate is set to auto.

There are three other settings on this dial: X for synching electronic flash at 1/60 - a dedicated gun can be used and operates in conjunction with an additional contact on the pentaprism mounted hot-shoe -B for long exposures where the cable release in the threaded shutter release may prove useful and an Off position which doubles as a lock.

Film speed is shown in ASA and runs from 25 to 1600, this is on a ring surrounding the re-wind knob which has a folding lever. Although there is a compensation button on the front of the camera this only gives an increased exposure of two stops when it is depressed. Full override could be given by altering the film speed setting but remember to set it back again
after taking the shot.

The film frame counter is additive and zeros when the back is opened. This is positioned immediately in front of the wind-on lever.

The standard 50mm f/1.7 lens comes in the Pentax ‘K’ mount so there are a good number of lenses available that could be fitted to this body in addition to the makers’ own Cosinon range.

Metering is handled by two Silicon cells in the head. There is a viewfinder indication of the shutter that is to be used and an under and over exposure LED signal.

Focusing is aided by a split image rangefinder with a microprism collar set on a matt field. The screens cannot be changed.

The self timer which sits on the front right of the body runs for 10 seconds and is indicated by a flashing LED on the front of the body. This must be switched off after use or it will continue operating for each shot.

There is an auto winder available allowing for single frame advance or continuous shooting up to two frames per second.

This is a fairly straightforward camera. There is nothing very novel about it but for anyone wanting a simple camera or a photographer who already owns a camera taking K’ mount lenses who wants a spare with auto exposure only, this should give first class service. The use of polycarbonates in the body makes for a light camera with a pleasant feel.
