This company have a wide range of exposure modes available in their various models and this is their manual offering. Here is another swing needle metering manual in the budget price bracket. As with other Cosina cameras it has the advantage of taking the Pentax ‘K’ bayonet lens mount and so has the widest possible range of optics available to fit it.

The controls are well laid out, easy to understand and there is not an abundance of them that would confuse the first time SLR buyer.

Starting at the left of the top plate is the film re-wind knob with its folding crank lever. This is surrounded by the film speed selection dial running from 25 to 1600ASA with third stop increments marked.

The hot-shoe is mounted in its inevitable position on top of the pentaprism housing and has no additional contacts for the use of a dedicated flash gun - but as with all manual cameras there would be little point in having one.

The shutter speed dial runs from 1 to 1 /1 OOOsec with the addition of B for longer exposures. The synch speed for electronic flash guns is 1/125 since the shutter is of the vertical travel variety.

The large, domed shutter release is threaded to take a cable release. There is a collar around this in the matt black finish of the whole camera.

The wind-on lever performs two functions. It advances the film smoothly with a single stroke of 135° and it also switches the meter on and off and locks the shutter release.

Turning the lever out to its parked ‘stand-off’ position brings the meter into operation. When it is turned
in flush to the body it locks the shutter-a useful feature but one to which you must get accustomed - it is easy to keep on stabbing at the release only to find it locked.

The front of the camera has a mechanical self timer for delayed action shots, this can be set for between two and 10 seconds depending on how far it is turned.

On the left of the lens housing is the P/C socket for a standard flash lead for off camera use.

The base has a tripod bush, the compartment for the single battery and the film re-wind button. There are no connections for a winder of any sort and one cannot be used with this camera. The back has a memo holder for the end of a film box.

To get correct exposure a needle must be centred on a scale marked + and - at the left edge of the focusing screen. Adjustment is a simple matter of altering the aperture or shutter speed selected.

The screen itself is a little unusual in that it has no split image centre spot and only a microprism area to aid focusing. Personally I prefer this to a split image but many other photographers would disagree.

The standard lens is a 50mm f/2 Cosinon-S which gives quite adequate results in day to day use. The camera is fairly compact and lightweight - the controls are well laid out and easy to find even with the eye firmly fixed to the viewfinder.

Metering is by a CdS cell, slower in response than some other types but reliable and accurate under a whole variety of conditions.

Either as a first or second camera this will give first rate results and will not cause too great a dent in any bank balance.
