When the Pentax ME Super was first launched its two push buttons for adjusting the manual shutter speeds raised more than a few eyebrows. Now Cosina have progressed one step further and given us the CT7 with four buttons and a whole symphony of bleeps every time a mode is changed.

Apart from the buttons the all black polycarbonate body contains a conventional camera. It accepts the Pentax ‘K’ bayonet mount lenses, takes an autowind and dedicated flash, has aperture priority automation with full manual override and the added advantage of an exposure memory lock.

The four buttons handle just about everything on the exposure front. They are positioned to the right of the pentaprism housing in the space where most of us would look for a shutter speed dial. The two innermost ones are marked Auto and MX, and the other two are marked Up, and Down.

Press the Auto button and the camera will be set in that mode with the metering system delivering the correct shutter speed for the selected aperture on the lens barrel. As the button is pressed the camera emits a bleep from the front of the body.

Press the button marked MX and the bleep tells you that you are in the manual mode. The speed given will be 1/125 which is the synchronisation speed for electronic flash. To change this either the Up or Down button must be pressed; Up gives faster speeds, Down slower. A series of taps achieves this quickly and easily.

This can all be carried out with the eye firmly fixed to the viewfinder. Sixteen LEDs parade down the side of the viewing area, just out of frame and beside a scale of shutter speeds. Also marked is M for manual, LT for speeds greater than a second and B, which is reached by tapping the Up or Down button to the end of the scale.
In the auto mode the Auto LED will light as well as the one against the speed which will be given. In manual the LED marked M lights, the shutter speed which will give correct exposure flashes and the one set glows - tapping brings these two together and then all is well. Nothing lights up at all if the film has not been wound on after an exposure. So there is the exposure system - purists might call it a bleeping Christmas Tree but others will love it.

The rest of the body is relatively conventional. At the left of the top plate is the folding re-wind crank and knob surrounded by the film speed selector. There is no exposure compensation control although the exposure memory lock on the left of the lens mounting largely removes the need for one.

The hot-shoe has one additional contact for dedicated flash. There is no other flash outlet.

The electronic shutter release is fairly small and threaded for a cable release, beside this is the frame counter which is additive and self-zeroing when the back is opened. The wind-on lever is just a touch stiff in operation, has a stand-off angle and must be operated in a single throw.

The self timer is operated by pressure on a button on the front of the body and is accompanied by a flashing LED in the control.

The camera comes with an f/1.8 50mm lens which gave a fair but not outstanding performance. However the ‘K’ mount lens means that there is a very wide range of optics to choose from as accessories to the basic camera.

This camera is almost a marriage between the photographer and the computer operator - if you like flashing lights and pressing buttons this would be ideal for you - if not, it still gives first class results and both the metering and the shutter speeds are completely reliable.
