A stunning design, well finished with quality build, the Fujica V2 looks big but is only a fraction wider than an Konica Auto S2, has a reassuring weight and some unique touches and quality details.

A highlight is the range-viewfinder which was dubbed a ‘Visible Control Center’, showing not only the aperture but also the selected shutter speed in the bottom left corner in the viewfinder. This permits you to make adjustments without removing the camera from your eye. Anything slower than 1/30 simply says ‘SLOW’ to remind you you might need a tripod. Even the condensed and well spaced typeface used here is well considered not just functional.

You see the subject or scene brightly and clearly, outlined in a glowing gold frame which corrects automatically for parallax. Focusing is indicated in the golden square in the centre of the frame. Unlike other cameras with a focusing lever on the lens barrel, focus is adjusted by means of the rear focusing wheel which falls naturally under your right thumb. This can take some getting used to when you are accustomed to adjusting focus on the lens barrel, but allows a firmer grip on the camera and is very precise. 

The film speed is set on a disc around the CdS window on the top right front of the body (reminiscent of the focusing wheel on the Argus C3). Because the CdS cell is not mounted inside the filter thread of the lens, manual compensation is required when using filters. Fujica boasted that the CdS electric eye was “extra sensitive to low light, you’ll find your Fujica still capable of taking pictures automatically where the usual automatic would have to switch to manual or flash”. The camera also features a ‘close-up light lock’ which allows for perfectly exposed pictures in situations with strong backlighting or side lighting.

The Citizen shutter, like that on the Minolta V2 and AL, is especially satisfying. The Copal shutters are fantastic and quiet but can sometimes leave you wondering if they fired. You can feel the Citizen fire and it makes a reassuring mechanical ‘snick’ that tells you you got the shot.

The film rewind crank is on the side of the body rather than on top which adds further to the unique design, allows the viewfinder to sit farther to the left and leaves plenty of clear space on the top for an authoritative logo. The door latch locks the back door firmly so you are assured that the film chamber is light tight.

Every bit of design associated with this camera is sophisticated and modern. From the two color print and the typography of the manual, bright orange cover with black and white photo, Trade Gothic over the conventional Futura/Helvetica, the Fuji logo with the mountain in the back… The nameplate around the lens is metal, not plastic. The battery cover is metal not plastic. The shutter speed and aperture dials stop with a definite click. All sounds perfect without even having mentioned the best part; the lens. The results are terrifically sharp, colours a tad cool, but without doubt among the best of this generation of fixed lens rangefinder camera.

P.S. There was also a version with top speed of 1/1000 second.