When this camera was first introduced in 1979 there was some criticism of it in the specialist photo press. The Fuji company proved receptive to this criticism and altered the minor points that had drawn comment.

The main reason why this camera has not had the impact of the Canon A-1 or the Minolta XD7 is the new bayonet lens mount, the ‘X’. Despite that it is a versatile camera that offers aperture and shutter speed priority automation, fully programmed, full manual and stopped-down metering and automatic flash with one of the Fuji range of dedicated guns.

As with any complex camera the top plate is fairly cluttered with controls and features. The re-wind knob at the user’s left hand end houses the folding lever. This is surrounded by the film speed selector which has the range 12 to 3200ASA in third of a stop increments. This is set against other markers to give one stop either way compensation to the exposure - not as wide as most others.

Beside this dial is the main on/off switch, this runs around the outside of the film speed dial, it has a third position, self timer, which gives a 12 second delay with a warning bleep.

The hot-shoe has two additional contacts for the use of dedicated flash guns.

The shutter speed dial sits to the right of the pentaprism. At the centre of this is the electromagnetic shutter release button which is threaded to take a cable release. First pressure on this illuminates the array of LEDs in the viewfinder, as an alternative there is a tiny switch to the front which can be pressed to the same effect.

As this dial is turned the speeds are shown in a small window to the right.

The speeds which can be selected are from 2 to 1/1000sec plus B and AE which sets the camera to aperture priority automation when the correct speed will be delivered steplessly. AEL allows a reading taken in the aperture priority mode to be locked into the camera’s ‘memory’ by depressing the shutter release.

The re-wind button is on the top plate behind the shutter speed dial. Beside this is the wind-on lever which can be used in single throw or a series of short ‘inching’ actions. In front of this lever is the frame counter which is additive and self-zeroing as the back is opened - it also turns itself back as the film is re-wound.

On the front of the camera and to the right of the lens
is the cover for the 6v battery housing. On the bottom right of the lens mounting is the stop-down button for metering in that mode or for a depth of field preview. On the left of the lens at the top of the body is the P/C flash lead socket, the flash synch speed is 1/60.

The ultra high quality f/1.6 lens, one of the sharpest around, has a small diamond mark beyond f/1.6. When this is set against the marker the camera is set in the shutter speed mode, where the speed is selected on the top plate and the lens then stops down to the correct aperture automatically.

Set the lens to auto and the shutter speed dial to AE and the camera will operate in the programmed mode, when it becomes a simple point and shoot model but gives consistently correct exposure.

The meter is driven by a Silicon cell giving a centre-weighted average reading. Indication is provided by a series of LEDs down the left side of the fixed screen.

The mode set is shown at the top, running down are aperture and shutter speed scales with an LED beside each, red for speeds, yellow for apertures.

Set the camera in the programmed mode and P lights up at the top and the LEDs beside the aperture and speed which will be given. In shutter speed priority a T lights as does both the speed and aperture - a flashing LED at the top or bottom of the scale warns of under or over exposure. In the aperture priority mode F lights and both the settings - again top or bottom will flash for warning of incorrect exposure. For manual metering an M shows at the top, the aperture and speed set light up and the aperture which would give the correct exposure flashes.

Fuji provide a comprehensive instruction manual with this camera and a run through with that and the camera before use would be well worthwhile.

In operation if feels a little awkward when compared to the other cameras in the group. The new Fuji X bayonet is slowly becoming available from the independents. Fuji’s own range of optics are being added to and they have something for just about every situation. A motor is due to become available, as is a data back.

On first sight this is not the most attractive multi mode camera - however owners will defend it fiercely and often site the ability of this camera to accept the older type screw mount lenses for limited metering with an adapter - (so do the Minolta and the Canon). This is, however, a very good camera.
