As leisure pursuits become more active photographers have looked around for cameras that will keep pace with their other interests. Until fairly recently the only answer was to buy a special housing for the camera. Now a whole new breed of cameras has emerged and the Fujica HD-S is among the best of them.

This camera will stand any amount of rough treatment that you care to subject it to, short of throwing it around or driving a nail into a wall with it. It can be buried, soaked, and covered in just about anything unpleasant, all without effect.

The makers do not claim that it is a true underwater camera but it will float and resist even sea water to an unbelievable degree. In addition it has a fully programmed exposure metering system, built-in flash and many of the features that would be expected on a camera that would not even survive a spot of rain - yet alone an Atlantic gale - and this camera has done that before now.

Metering is by means of a CdS cell situated below the lens, which is a 38mm f/2.8, both are protected by a sheet of 4mm heavy-duty coated optical glass. If the light level is too low for the camera to give correct exposure a red LED lights in the viewfinder but the camera can still be fired.

On top of the lens housing is the focusing scale which runs in both feet and meters. There is also a
mechanical self timer giving a delay of 10 seconds.

The top plate controls are large and positive - it is quite likely that they would be operated with the user’s hands deep in gloves. On the top there is a larger than usual, rubber covered, shutter release, the button to switch the flash on, the film speed selector which runs from 64 to 400ASA, the large wind-on lever and the frame counter.

The flash has automatic operation and a guide number of 40 (1 OOASA/ft), there is also a ready light on the back of the top plate.

On the right hand end of the body, where the back closes, is a larger rubber clamp which holds it closed and forms a pleasant grip for wet or cold hands. Loading the film is a bit of a problem but this camera is designed to take hard knocks.

Under action conditions the programmed metering really comes into its own: to operate just point, focus and shoot. In moments of excitement I’ve known people shoot film that wasn’t even loaded - it can’t happen here - a small window on the back confirms that there is film loaded and if it is a Fuji film the code will show so the user can tell at a glance what film is loaded up.

Although Fuji state very strongly that this is not an underwater camera I have had it submerged with no ill effects - but I wouldn’t recommend a dip of longer than a second or two in very shallow water.
