The Kodak system of instant photography has been available for several years. The first obvious difference between prints from one of these cameras and one from a Polaroid is the format. Kodak has given us ai oblong picture rather than the square image ot Polaroid.

The camera itself has an upright and square appearance with a built-in electronic flash head at the top. This is slid out to the right for action and a flashing light tells you when it is fully charged and ready for action. It is fully automatic and will give correctly exposed flash shots between four and 10 feet.

The PR-10 film pack gives 10 shots, which are ejected through the bottom of the camera by means of the built-in motor. The print then takes a minute or two to fully darken.

Power for the whole unit is provided by four ‘ AA’ size penlight batteries which should give power for up to 100 flashes - there is a warning light to tell you when power is low.

Exposure is fully automatic with the only user control being the lighten/darken control in the form of a switch on the front of the body. This gives up to plus or minus a full f/stop override on the indicated meter reading for awkward subjects that could ‘fool’ the built-in meter.

The lens is a 100mm f/12.8 which offers that aper-
ture and f/18. The electronic shutter ranges between 2 and 1/300sec and gives a viewfinder warning when the light level falls below f/12.8 at 1 /15sec.

The frame counter on this camera is additive, it shows how many shots have been taken rather than how many are left to be taken.

There is a built-in tripod socket and the camera comes complete with a multi-coloured neck strap -with a weight of 37ozs carrying this camera around can prove rather a chore.

The lens gives sharp results and the metering system is consistently good. The prints from this system are bright and well balanced although the colour is not up to the standard of Polaroid. That is not to say this is the inferior instant camera, rather that it is different and the rendition of colours more subtle and muted. The oblong prints certainly make for easier and better composition.

It could well be that Kodak are working on a Mark 2 film for these cameras which will be more in line with the others on the market. PR-10 has been with us for nearly five years now, fairly old by modern film standards, so any improvement could upgrade the system to one of the best available. Either way this is a pleasant camera to use which will not disappoint any newcomer to instant picture taking.
