CONTAX 167 MT: CLASSY HIGH TECH

SPECIFICATIONS: 35mm SLR with multiple autoexposure modes plus metered manual. Body No. 011354. LENS: 50mm f/1.4 Carl Zeiss Planar in Contax/Yashica MM interchangeable bayonet mount. SHUTTER: Electronically controlled, vertical-travel, metal focal-plane with speeds from 16 seconds to 1/4000 second in auto and manual modes, plus В in manual mode only, X sync at 1/125 second. EXPOSURE SYSTEM: Two-section SPD cell above eyepiece provides center-weighted or spot readings at AE lock setting; AE modes include standard, high speed, and low speed programs, shutter priority; DX auto film speed setting for films ISO 255000, manual ISO settings 6-6400. FLASH: Single SPD cell at bottom of mirror box provides center-weighted TTL, aperture-preferred TTL autoflash and manual flash auto sync speed setting with dedicated flash units. VIEWFINDER:	Fixed eye-level

pentaprism with central split-image rangefinder, microprism collar, full focusing interchangeable screen; LCD atop viewing area displays exposure compensation, shutter speed/fllm speed, set aperture, frame counter, (or elapsed time at В setting, or self-timer countdown), spot metering mark, AE lock I use, flash ready-light and exposure confirmation signal. OTHER FEATURES: Integral autowinder has single frame, continuous run (to 3 fps) and electronic self-timer settings, automatic exposure bracketing, top-mounted LCD panel displays same settings as in-flnder LCD plus shooting mode, film rewind mark. Self-timer LED, provision for data back. BATTERIES: Four 1.5 volt AAA batteries power all operations; built-in lithium cell provides memory backup. PRICE: $1,010 with 50mm f/1.4 lens.

Ever since Yashica (now a division of Kyocera Corp.) began making Contax SLRs in Japan back in the early 70s, they have been remarkably successful in living up to the proud Zeiss heritage behind the Contax name. With input from European designers, Contaxes were among the first to employ soft, rubberized body coverings for superior comfort and grip, and they have always been elegantly proportioned, and extremely pleasant to hold and operate, with their smooth, ergonomically placed controls.

The lenses ordinarily mounted on the Contax's sturdy, chromed steel bayonet mount bear the legendary name of Carl Zeiss (less expensive lenses in Yashica/Contax mount also fit and function in manual aperture priority modes). These lenses are German designs made by Yashica in Japan to Zeiss's exacting specifications.

For the last decade, Contaxes have been developed along two parallel lines— professional models like the RTS and the current RTS II, and what might be termed high tech multimode models for the serious enthusiast. This latter group includes such distinctive machines as the original Contax 139 and 137 and the still-current 137MA and 159MM (the first Contax to offer programmed autoexposure via slightly modified MM-mount lenses). The Contax 167MT, the subject of this test, combines most of the outstanding features of these last two models and adds such leading edge items as auto bracketing, three program modes and comprehensive LCD readouts.

To turn on this electronically controlled SLR with built-in motor drive, flick the main switch around the electromagnetic shutter release forward, thereby uncovering a red dot. The instant you do so, the exposure mode in use, plus aperture, shutter speed and frame number are displayed for 16 seconds on the smallish, top-mounted LCD panel, which then turns itself off to conserve power. To turn on the display again, touch the mode or shutter button lightly. The nicely contoured main switch lever has three click-stopped, power on positions for different metering options— center-weighted (denoted by a rectangle), spot (indicated by a small circle) and autoexposure lock (opposite the AEL mark) which locks in spot readings taken in any autoexposure mode. Once you lock in a reading in AEL, its light value is stored in memory, so you can then switch to another aperture or shutter speed without altering the exposure—an excellent feature.

Like many recent SLRs, the 167 doesn't have a conventional shutter-speed dial, film speed dial, or even a mode-selector lever. All functions are controlled by an electronic sliding switch behind the shutter release, which Contax engineers call an operating lever. Hold in the mode button behind the LCD panel (with the LCD on) and change modes by pressing the nicely ridged but smallish operating lever either to the left or right. Press this spring-loaded switch repeatedly until the mode you want is displayed on the LCD. The choice of exposure modes is impressive—TV (time value, that is, shutter-preferred), AV (aperture-preferred), M (metered manual) and three Program modes, Program High, Normal Program, and Program Low.

Of these six modes there are only two in which you ordinarily select a shutter speed, manual (M) and shutter-preferred (TV). Choose either one and you change shutter speeds by pressing the operating lever without holding in the mode button. Press once toward the right and quickly release the switch and your shutter speed will get faster by one full step. Hold the switch toward the right and the shutter-speed numbers on the LCD increase rapidly until they top out at 4000 (that is, 1/4000 second, the 167's top shutter speed). To set slower (longer) shutter speeds, press or hold in the operating toward the left. The same procedure applies for manually set film speeds except that you must hold in the little ISO button behind the LCD panel while pressing the operating lever—to the right for higher ISOs. With DX-coded film the camera automatically sets films speeds from ISO 25-5000, which you can check at any time by pressing the ISO button. Manually settable ISOs cover a wider range, from 6-6400.

In aperture-preferred (AV) or manual mode, you set apertures the good old fashioned way, by turning an aperture ring at the rear of the lens barrel; it's click-stopped at full stop intervals. However, the Contax 167 is certainly up to date in reading out apertures (in half-step increments) and shutter speeds in two places at once—on the top-mounted LCD and in the viewfinder above the focusing screen.

In many ways, the thin, white, two section LCD panel atop the viewfinder is one of the camera's nicest features. It lights up whenever you touch the shutter release (irrespective of light level) so its clear black numerals are always visible. It displays the frame number in a separate box, left of the exposure readouts, a Contax first that is still the best of its kind.

The seemingly sparse in-finder LCD also conveys a surprising amount of additional information while remaining mercifully uncluttered. In metered manual mode a plus or minus flashes at the left of the shutter speed if the exposure is incorrect; simply change the shutter speed and/or aperture until both signs disappear to get the correct metered exposure. Set the exposure compensation dial to a value other than zero and a plus appears if you've dialed in extra exposure, a minus if you've dialed in less. Choose spot meter mode and you'll see a tiny circle in between the shutter-speed and aperture numerals; select AE Lock and the circle flashes in warning. Select any of the three program modes and a P appears at the extreme right.

The over/underexposure warning is equally simple and unmistakable—if the “4000" shutter speed flashes while you're in any autoexposure mode, your shot will be overexposed, if the "16" inch (16 second) speed flashes, it'll be underexposed. Given the camera’s wide metering range, you’ll seldom see these warnings. Our only compaint about the 167’s in-finder readouts: Some eyeglass wearers won’t be able to see the full viewing area and the LCD in a single glance with the rubber-edged eyecup in place. Most will be able to do so with the eyecup removed.

For a camera aimed at advanced photographers, the Contax 167 is equipped with a surprising number of failsafe overrides designed to prevent typical amateur mistakes. For example, if the shutter speed you select in shutter-priority (TV) moded cannot provide the proper exposure at any of the available apertures, the camera will automatically change shutter speeds to provide the correct metered exposure. The altered shutter speed is displayed in the finder, so if you object to the camera taking over you can point it at a subject that gives you the reading you want and lock in the reading with the AE lock, or switch to manual mode. The same philosophy prevails in program and TV modes if you fail to set the lens to the green-coded minimum aperture (as you must to access the full range of aperture settings). Here the Contax automatically provides the correct exposure using the limited aperture range in between the maximum aperture of the lens and the aperture you’ve set—a system used by other cameras with similar program modes. There's nothing conceptually wrong with either of these automatic safety systems (the latter can even be used creatively to limit depth of field, for example), but we would prefer that the camera warn you to reconsider your shutter speed or aperture selection by flashing the P or the shutter speed in the finder.

Inset into the left-hand side of the prism housing is a cute little three-position switch that's the only control on the 167 that's a tad too small for easy manipulation—the wind mode/self-timer switch. It’s got the usual settings found on late-model cameras with built-in winders—S for single-frame advance, C for continuous advance at up to three frames per second, and S-T, for self-timer. Select S-T and press the shutter release and an LED at the bottom of the built-in handgrip flashes—first rapidly, then about once per second, then rapidly again just before the shutter fires ten seconds later. The delay remaining is simultaneously counted down in LCD digits in both frame counters. You can't miss it.

Once the shutter fires, the motor immediately winds to the accompaniment of a distinctively high pitched but low intensity whir. Actual noise is about average, and most of those asked to comment on the 167’s unusual sounding “click-wind' sequence said the camera had a “high quality" sound.

Before we get to our field test, let's turn to the 167's pioneering feature— autobracketing, or as they say at the Contax factory, Automatic Continuous Exposure Compensation. To set autobracket, direct your attention to the green and white scale to the right of the prism housing, just below what must be the most prominent and easiest to set exposure compensation dial extant (it's settable to plus or minus two stops in one-third stop intervals). The white segment of the scale, labeled AV, has clickstopped setting marked 0, 0.5 and 21; the adjacent green segment is labeled P.TV and has stops marked 0, 1, 21.5. Both are simultaneously set by turning the same small ridged tab to the left of the shutter release in a clockwise direction. Which scale applies obviously depends on which autoexposure (AE) mode you've set—the white scale values apply only in aperture-priority (AV) mode, the green ones in program (P) or shutter-priority modes. The numbers themselves refer to the exposure variation (in steps or stops) between the successively bracketed exposures.

To bracket automatically, select your AE mode, set the amount of exposure variation you want on the appropriate scale, and set the wind mode control to C. Now hold in the shutter release and the camera will fire a three-frame sequence (overexposure, correct exposure, and underexposure) and then stop. As soon as you turn on the auto bracket, the left-hand digit of the in-finder frame counter flashes in warning. As the sequence is shot, the exposure counter displays flash both digits then the right digit, then the left to indicate the shooting order. The Contax's autobracketing system works very well and is certainly a welcome addition on a posh multimode SLR aimed at hard-core enthusiasts. However, it's not the most flexible system imaginable—you can only bracket in half stops in AV mode, the maximum exposure variation is 1.5 stops (in P and TV modes), and autobracketing isn't possible at all in manual exposure mode.

All right, let’s take some pictures. Hold in the back lock button as you slide the lock down and the back pops open. Swing it to the right and you're greeted with a beautifully finished interior with all the modern conveniences—gold-plated DX contacts (in the film chamber), gold-plated databack contacts (below the film aperture) and an easy-loading film take-up drum to the right of the sprocket shaft. Hook the film cartridge under the rewind shaft, pull the film leader out to the orange mark (make sure it lies flat) and close the camera. Press the shutter release and the camera fires and winds three times while the film wind signal built into the thumbrest on the back rotates if the film has been loaded properly. Both exposure counters (on the LCD atop the camera and in the finder) now read “01." Now hold in the mode button, and press the operating lever until the word “Program" appears on the LCD. Make sure the lens is set to minimum aperture (green digits).

In the 167's normal program mode, shutter speeds get faster and apertures get smaller in equal amounts as the light level increases, starting at 1/15 second with 50mm f/1.4 lens at ISO 100. Select the low-speed program (Program Low) and the program provides smaller apertures and slower shutter speeds to maximize depth-of-field at light levels above EV6. Select the high-speed program (Program High) and the lens remains wide open until the proper-exposure shutter speed reaches 1/250 second. In other words, this program is biased to provide actionstopping shutter speeds when possible.

Once you match the program to your shooting conditions you can concentrate on your subject and enjoy one of the 167's most commendable features, its bright, very contrasty focusing screen. In its center is a tiny split-image rangefinder surrounded by a small microprism collar. The outer perimeter of the collar accurately defines the spot metering area, and both focusing aids are surprisingly effective and easy to use despite their minuscule size. We also liked the focusing action of the 50mm f/1.4 Planar—it's very smooth and well damped—and its focusing and aperture-ring collars, which are wide, well placed and very grippable. Two small compaints: 1. The depth-of-field preview button requires such a hard push it dents your index finger. 2. A small, fiddly coin sloted cover lock mars an otherwise well resigned four-AAA battery compartment built into the bottom of the body.

The Contax 167’s through-the-lens (TTL) flash system is as sophisticated as its exposure and readout systems. Mount a dedicated Contax flash unit (such as the TLA 20 or TLA 30) in the three-contact dedicated hot shoe and you have the options of programmed autoflash and auto daylight fill flash in program modes, the equivalent of Program TTL autoflash in shutter-preferred mode, a full choice of apertures in aperture-priority TTL mode, and semi-automatic control of the subject-to-background flash ratio by using the AE lock or exposure compensation dial. As soon as the dedicated flash is fully charged, the shutter is automatically set to the flash sync speed of 1/125 second and a lightning bolt comes on in the finder display. After the flash has fired, the lightning bolt blinks for about two seconds to confirm correct exposure. If the “125" blinks in the finder, select a smaller aperture or your picture will be overexposed—a useful type of warning not found on many other SLRs.

The 167 continues the Contax tradition of excellent handling and fine balance. Indeed, we found it to be even more comfortable than most of its predecessors, which were widely admired for their luxurious feel and convenient contours. (Only the RTS II equals and possibly surpasses the 167 in these respects.) Its controls are all sensibly placed and easy to memorize so that operating the camera at eye level (with an occasional glance at the main LCD when changing modes) becomes fluid and natural after shooting a couple of rolls. As you can see by glancing at the performance charts, the Contax provides high performance in all measurable categories. What is perhaps more important in this age of rampant me-tooism, it also offers refinement, distinction, and a touch of class for those who can appreciate and afford it.
