Mamiya RZ67 Pro II

According to Mamiya, the RZ67 Pro II was not a replacement to the tried-and-true RZ67 when first introduced, but should instead be regarded as a deluxe model. (Translation: Mamiya still had a large inventory of RZ67’s, so please buy those first.) The Pro IPs upgrades were worthwhile and timely, however.

Several things are new on the Pro II. Starting with the camera body, the focusing system has been improved. The Pro II still has right and left side focusing knobs, but the right one has been changed from a single knob to a coaxial pair of knobs, larger in diameter than the old one. The outer knob operates the RZ67 Pro IPs rack-and-pinion focusing mechanism in the traditional manner. The inner knob is a fine-focus control, which should ease critical focusing tasks greatly.
Shutter speeds can now be set in half-stop increments from 1/200 second to 4 seconds.

The Pro II has an improved focusing screen with three LED displays that render the following information: the first will remind you if the camera hasn’t been cocked when you try to take a picture, the second reminds you to remove the dark slide (doubles as a battery indicator), and the third indicates when a Pro ITdedicated flash is ready to fire (there are no Pro Il-dedicated flashes available yet, though).

A new AE Prism Finder is also being produced for the Pro II. Its shape is more rounded than predecessors and its control layout is reminiscent of that on the Mamiya M645 Pro. The finder has a shutter speed control, ±3 EV of exposure compensation in x/i stop increments, and a meter pattern selector. The available patterns are Spot, Averaging and an automatic switching mode, which evaluates the contrast in a scene and which will switch between Spot or Averaging as the situation dictates.

Also new for the Pro II is a redesigned film magazine. It’s basically the same as earlier RZ67 film magazines, but for one very handy feature: there are now two film counter windows, which means that one is always visible from the top of the camera, no matter what position the back happens to be in.
