Mamiya have always been a leading name in the world of roll film cameras but never seem to have come up with a winning 35mm model. Their latest introduction aims to alter that situation and may well succeed.

This camera offers aperture and shutter speed priority automation, fully programmed exposure, manual setting (without metering), flash automation and Crossover. It also warns of possible camera shake - not only at a set shutter speed but at the danger speed for each individual lens. All this is carried out by the most complex signalling system between camera body and lens, a system that Mamiya describe as the ‘Miracle Mount’, in which all information is relayed automatically.

On the left of the top plate is a sliding switch which sets the camera in Crossover. This control is capable of overriding the instructions given by the photographer. If set in the shutter speed priority automatic mode at, say, 1/125sec the light may demand an aperture of f/5.6. Conditions could become darker which would mean that the lens would continue opening up through f/4 and f/2.8 to the maximum aperture, and in the case of the standard lens to f/1.7. If the light is then reduced further under exposure would result. This is the point at which Crossover takes over the controls. Keeping the lens at f/1.7 it would reduce the shutter speed to 1 /60 and so on. This works in exactly the same way with shutter speed priority automation but will not allow the camera to produce a shot with shake. With a 50mm lens it will not allow a shutter speed of longer than 1/30sec, with a 135mm lens 1/125sec and so on. Of course these can be used by switching Crossover off.

The dedicated flash system works with the new style
EF lenses by computing the light required from the film speed set on the camera, the distance the lens is focused at and the aperture set on the lens ring - a foolproof system which also cancels the flash if there is sufficient light for photography without the danger of camera shake.

These features are contained in a camera that is very easy to use. Aperture priority automation is set by turning the shutter speed dial to the A setting. Shutter speed priority automation is set by turning the aperture ring on the lens to a white button, setting the minimum aperture and then selecting the aperture required on the dial on the top plate.

To place the camera in the Programmed mode, where shutter speed and aperture are selected by the camera, both the above controls are set.

Full exposure automation is shown in the finder by red LEDs below the screen and there is a warning if the exposure override control is in use. The shutter release is electromagnetic and light and easy to operate. Remote firing is electronic with a special set of contacts provided at the top left of the body. This can also be used to fit a left handed grip which can be used for firing the shutter.

This camera has a few pleasant finishing touches -a memo holder on the back, a choice of three electronic delays signalled by a red LED at the front of the body and an easy to use exposure memory lock. This multi mode camera certainly measures up to the opposition. My only slight reservation is the lack of independent lenses to fit it but since Mamiya are extending their own system that will soon no longer be a problem.
