Mamiya offer a range of bodies in the 6 x 4.5cms format and this is the most feature packed of them. The rectangular negative will give 15 shots on a roll of 120 film or 30 on a roll of 220 by means of special film inserts rather than interchangeable backs.

The basic camera has no metering facility but the AE Prism Finder available will give aperture priority automation with stepless shutter speeds and also has a memory lock. There is also a manual metering version, the CdS Prism Finder, both these give eye level 'right way round viewing’ and have hot-shoes fixed on the top.

For greater metering sensitivity the PD Prism Finder S uses Silicon cells and gives an LED viewfinder indication of exposure information.

The film inserts can be pre-loaded to speed up changing rolls but it is not possible to change materials in mid roll as it is with a camera where the whole back can be changed. This method costs a great deal less.

The camera has an electrically operated focal plane shutter, which makes the lenses cheaper since they do not have to be fitted with their own between the lens shutter. On the other hand it means that electronic flash can be synchronised at a fastest speed of 1/60 sec. However there is one 70mm f/2.8 lens which has a built in leaf shutter with a range of speeds from 1 /30 to 1 /500sec, all of which can be used with an electronic flash gun.

For action work motorised film advancing is possible with the power drive. This allows winding at a rate of a single frame per second and has a hand-grip with its own shutter release.

The basic camera has a lay-out familiar to users of any range of this type of camera. The waist level finder flips up for action and has a built-in magnifier. The screens can be easily changed, with five variations to choose from.
The right of the body carries the winding crank with its fold-out lever, just behind this is the multiple exposure lever and to the front the mirror-up lever.

To the rear is the exposure counter and on a cut-out platform at the front the battery check button and second shutter release.

The front houses the lens release button, the shutter release at the bottom right, which has a locking collar, and the self timer which can be set for a delay of between five and 10 seconds.

The shutter speed dial sits on the left of the body, this has speeds from 8 to 1 /1 OOOsec and B, the shutter is electronically operated and it is only possible to get a B operation with power - so it pays to carry a spare set of batteries.

The P/C flash terminal sockets, X for electronic flash and FP for bulbs are at the back left of the body.

This is a very pleasant, light and well balanced camera to use. The important consideration for most photographers would be the format. In practice, 6 x 4.5cms relates more closely to the standard paper size than a square image. This means that all the shots are in the landscape format. For an upright shot the camera must be turned on its side which is a little awkward and operating the controls in this position can be difficult.

The film inserts are economical and the film can be changed from 120 to 220 by simple use of a catch on the insert. Up to 30 shots are therefore available from a single roll using the basic camera, without the need to buy accessories.

There is a wide enough range of lenses and general accessories available to make this a true professional system camera; the lenses are first rate and the camera well built, well laid out and reasonably priced. If you do not intend changing film types mid-way through a roll this is a most attractive roll film camera.