THE GS645: FUJI’S FANCY FOLDER
MANUFACTURER’S SPECIFICATIONS: Fujica GS645 Professional, folding range-finder camera for 15 exposures 2 1/4 x 1 5/8 in. (6 x 4.5cm) on 120 film, 30 exposures on 220 film. 
LENS: 75mm f/3.4 EBC Fujinon S, No. determined by body, in noninterchangeable, double-helical mount, stops to f/22, focusing to 1 meter (39 in.). 
SHUTTER: Copal No. 00 between-lens leaf with speeds from 1-1/500 sec. plus T, X sync at all speeds, self-timer. 
VIEWING: Combined, coincidence-type range/viewfinder with projected, parallax- and field-size-compensating framelines. 
OTHER FEATURES: Built-in gallium photo-diode (GPD) meter cell behind semi-silvered mirror in finder, powered by two 1.5 volt alkaline-manganese batteries, is coupled with shutter speed, aperture and ASA scales to provide center-weighted readings with films ASA/ISO 25-1600; LED readouts in finder activated by partially depressing shutter release; automatic film stop and frame counter provide double- and blank-exposure prevention; integral hot shoe; film box end clip; shutter lock. 
PRICE: $530.00.

Back in the late 1950’s photographers had the choice of two excellent folding rangefinder cameras providing а 2 1/4 x 1 5/8 in. (6x4.5 cm) format on 120 roll film — the renowned Zeiss Super Ikonta A and the equally brilliant, if less well known, Konica Pearl IV. Both provided fine performance and a relatively large negative in a truly pocketable package, but the trend was away from folding cameras of all types (except for innumerable Polaroid models) and by the mid-60s, virtually all of them had vanished from the scene. Now, nearly 20 years hence, Fuji (perhaps eyeing the recent success of the larger 6x7cm format Plaubel Makina 67 and its wide-angle cousin, the 67W) has brought out its own full-featured version of the 6 x 4.5cm format folding rangefinder roll film camera—the GS645.

How does the GS645 fit in among current and classic rangefinder, roll film folders? In a most intriguing manner. For starters, it’s about one-third larger than its 50s counterparts, measuring in at 5 3/4 x 4 7/16 x 2 3/16 in. folded, extended to 4 3/4 in. deep in shooting position. However, the use of molded polycarbonate in such areas as its top and bottom covers and hinged bed/lens cover has kept its weight down to a modest 1 lb., 12% oz. sans batteries, and it will still slide quite easily into most overcoat and jacket pockets while ensconced in its soft pouch case.

In terms of its mechanical and optical design, the GS645 most closely resembles the aforementioned Konica Pearl IV which combined a very rigid front standard with hefty, pivoting support braces on two sides of the lens, a unit-focusing, 5-element lens, and a true projected finder frame providing both parallax- and field-frame size compensation throughout its focusing range. This latter type of compensation decreases the size of the viewing field defined by the framelines as the lens is focused closer, correcting for its narrower coverage angle at closer focusing distances. As a result the Fuji’s finder shows almost exactly what appears on film irrespective of the focusing distance.

The GS645’s large .63X life-size magnification range/viewfinder (which provides a claimed 90% field of view at infinity, 92% at 1 meter) has 3 metering LEDs along the right-hand edge. It’s the principal reason the camera is so much taller than its predecessors. The metering system itself hews rather closely to the one found in the Plaubel Makina 67s, with a gallium photo-diode (GPD) placed behind a semi-silvered mirror in the finder (see page 84 for details). It's fully coupled to the shutter speed and aperture controls and provides match-diode metering. We’ll go through its operation a bit later on.

With the GS645’s basic identity firmly;established, let’s examine its features in greater detail. As you might imagine, loading any roll film folder is a pretty conventional operation, but Fuji’s attention to improving minor details is noteworthy. You begin by pulling out and pushing down on a hinged gray tab marked “Open” on the camera’s right-hand side—it’s easy even if you lack stout fingernails or you’re wearing light gloves. Now swing the textured back to the left and you’re greeted by a very well finished interior with the usual film chambers on either sides of the film aperture. The Fuji loads left to right, and to facilitate spool removal, press a small red button under each chamber and the spring-loaded spool retainer pops down.

Before you insert a fresh roll in the left-hand chamber, check to see that the pressure plate is set to ""120м or “220” to match the film you’re using—if it isn’t, press the pressure plate in and slide it to the left or right as required. Then set the frame counter selector (it’s located about 21/2 in. to the right of the finder eyepiece on the Fuji’s back) for either 120 (15 exposures) or 220 (30 exposures) film. Finally, insert the film and take-up spool, push up the spool retainers until they click into place, thread the paper leader, and stroke the wind lever until the vertical arrow on the paper backing coincides with a down-pointing silver arrow atop the film aperture, close the back and stroke the film-wind lever until the counter adjacent to the shutter release moves from “S” to 1, at which point the wind lever will stop.

Before you can take a picture you’ve got to do two more things—unfold the camera and set the film speed. To open the GS645 press in on a gray “bar” on the front of the folded camera and swing the hinged bed to the left until it locks in place with a soft click. Now direct your attention to the three main control rings around the front of the lens barrel. The one closest to the front of the lens is the shutter-speed scale, which is adorned with large, legible white-on-black numerals from 1 to 500 and has click-stops at each setting. Directly behind it is the aperture ring, which has equally large and legible yellow-on-black f/stops from f/3.4 (a strange aperture that!) to f/22 and has no click-stops whatsoever. The ASA readout window is about half an inch to the left-of the f/3.4 setting on the aperture ring but the ASA-setting ring itself can easily be missed without a scorecard or instruction manual—it’s a thin ring in between the shutter speed and aperture rings that's attached to the latter. At one point it terminates in a little hump with a fingernail slot in the middle and to set the proper ASA you’ve got to move it back and forth until the proper digits click into position. It’s quite simple once you’re used to it.

As you’ve probably figured out by now, the third or rearmost control ring near the front of the Fuji’s lens is the focusing ring which moves the entire lens back and forth for focusing, an arrangement that’s optically superior to the front-cell-focusing system used in other folding rangefinder cameras, notably the Zeiss Super Ikonta A. The Fuji’s focusing ring has a very comfortable milled finger notch that can be easily manipulated with your right thumb or forefinger irrespective of the distance set. The focusing ring moves about 120° counterclockwise to focus the lens from infinity down to 1 meter and its action is wonderfully smooth and predictable. Inscribed on the front standard just behind the focusing scale is the main focusing index, infrared focusing index and a 5-aperture depth-of-field scale.

As long as we’re up at the front of the camera, let’s glance at two small but important features. With the Fuji held in the normal (vertical format) position, look about an inch to the right of the depth-of-field scale and you’ll find a little square red-bodied, black-topped button marked “T.” It rises only when the shutter is cocked and when you press it in, the shutter stays open. This is accomplished via a mechanical linkage, so no battery power is wasted during long time exposures. To terminate a time exposure, just press the normal round, threaded shutter release atop the camera. Another “old fashioned” feature is located on the left-hand side of the lens barrel, just behind the aperture ring. It’s a spring-wound mechanical self-timer that’s set by moving a very vintage looking little chrome lever downwards in a short arc. Once you do this, you’ll get a delay of about 8 sec. the next time you press the shutter even if you change your mind. Like the self-timers of old, this one’s non-cancellable. Also, the little cutaway area through which the lever moves is a potential entry point for dirt or dust. It’s not a big deal, but it is unfortunate in an otherwise well sealed body.

As long as we’re griping, we may as well point out that we were less than thrilled at having to wind the film-advance lever and set the lens to infinity before being able to fold the camera shut. Aside from the nuisance factor, we are not in favor of storing cameras with their shutters cocked for long periods, or of storing folding cameras in their vulnerable open position. Oh, well—at least the unlocking bar (it’s marked “close” and located behind the gray “opening latch”) is conveniently placed and functions flawlessly when folding the Fuji.

Fortunately for Fuji fans, all carping is likely to cease once you raise the GS645 to eye level and start to take pictures. The range/viewfinder is superb— perhaps the best one ever fitted to a folder of this format. It has a slight bluish tint and since about 75 percent of the light passing through it is siphoned off for metering, it’s not dazzlingly bright. However, it’s certainly bright enough even for available light shooting in dim light and it’s extraordinarily clear and contrasty at all times. The round, yellow focusing patch in the center provides a very bright, contrasty, well differentiated secondary image that’s almost in the Leica M-series class, and the thin-lined yellow field frame is extremely bright and well defined even under the most unfavorable shooting conditions. The fact that its magnification is 2/з lifesize also means you can view and focus with both eyes if you prefer, but eyeglass wearers will be able to see the entire frame.

Equally pleasant and well thought out is the Fuji’s metering system. Once you’ve set your ASA and chosen a shutter speed, bring the camera to eye level, partially depress the shutter release, and simultaneously turn the aperture ring until the circular red LED at the midpoint of the right-hand finder edge, just outboard of the finder frameline, lights up. If only the circular LED lights, you’ve set the correct exposure right on the nose according to the metering system. Overexposure is indicated by a red (+) sign above the circular LED and underexposure is indicated by a minus sign (-) below it. If either the plus or minus barely glows while the circular LED is brightly lit this indicates over- or underexposure of 1/3 stop respectively; if the circular LED is barely lit while the plus or minus glows brightly this indicates over- or underexposure of about a stop. The nicest thing about Fuji’s system, in addition to its being very accurate, is that it’s commendably sensitive without being finicky. In other words, it allows you to meter accurately to within 1/3 stop without suffering from the “LED flutters.”

There is only one thing about metering with the Fuji that’s mildly annoying until you get used to it and that’s grabbing and manipulating the aperture ring. Unlike the focusing ring, it’s not blessed with a large finger grip, and the knurling on its bottom surface (the only part without a numerical scale) is fairly shallow. This means you must instead place your fingertip atop a tiny black lug to the left of the ASA window to get enough purchase to turn the ring properly. There’s a nearly identical ring in about the same place on the shutter-speed ring, probably because it's also shallowly knurled on its bottom. We can appreciate that this area of the camera is perforce crowded with major controls but we wish Fuji had devised more comfortable finger grips and/or better differentiated knurling. We must admit, however, that we did get used to operating the Fuji by feel quite efficiently after a few days shooting with it.

Speaking of feel, this is another area in which the GS645 really scores well. The righthand side of the body is broadened to form a very effective, textured grip, and the shutter release and wind lever are both well positioned for comfortable use. We found the wind lever very comfortably contoured also, although we would have preferred it to be ratcheted so it could be operated in two short strokes instead of one rather long 180° stroke. We also found the GS645 to be exceptionally well balanced, so much so that a photographer with a steady grip should be able to shoot sharp pictures at 1/30 sec. or even a bit slower. The very smooth, predictable shutter release would be a definite asset in available light shooting. It requires but moderate finger pressure to fire the shutter yet we were never in any doubt as to how much additional pressure was required to shoot the picture, and we never fired the shut ter mistakenly while metering. Incidentally, the above reference to low light shooting is not an idle one—we found the GS645 comfortably exceeded its official specs and would meter accurately down to about 1/2 sec. at f/3.4 with ASA 400 film.

All in all we were quite taken with Fuji’s answer to the classic rangefinder roll film camera and we were delighted with its performance, practicality and portability. While the word “Professional” that’s emblazoned in full green on its front is certainly appropriate when you consider its optical and mechanical performance, this is really a fun camera that shows what happens when an “old fashioned” pocketable medium-format concept is intelligently updated. Undoubtedly, pros in search of a pocketable medium-format, non-interchangeable-lens alternative will go for it (indeed, many already have) but so will advanced amateurs who appreciate the advantages of a large film size in a camera with real character. Yes, that’s it, character. Its foibles may annoy at first, but once you’ve gotten beyond them, shooting with a camera having a distinctive personality to complement its fine performance is a unique and pleasurable experience.

Field test slides: Images appear crisp and snappy at all apertures, but sharpness improves noticeably at f/5.6 and smaller apertures. Color fringing barely noticeable in corners. Flare well controlled overall. Optical bench analysis (for optical experts only): On axis, diffraction limited by f/8, very slight overcorrected spherical aberration gone by f/8. Off axis, very slight coma, gone by f/5.6, slight lateral color overall.

