

TYPE: Fuji medium format folding camera with coupled rangefinder and built-in metering FORMAT: 6X4.5-cm roll film, 120 (15 exposures) or 220 (30 exposures)

LENS: EBC Fujinon 75mm f/3.4, live elements in four groups, Angle ol view is 50°

SHUTTER: Copal No. 00 mechanical interlens shutter with speeds from 'Aoo to 1 second, T, and a mechanical sell-timer. Flash is X 
VIEWFINDER: Coupled rangefinder with base line ot 39.5mm and effective base line of 24.9mm. Auto parallax-correcting bright-line frame finder with a Held of view of 90 percent at Infinity and 92 percent at one meter. Meter information via three LED symbols 
EXPOSURE CONTROL: External light meter with meter display situated in viewfinder. Single GPD meter cell coupled to shutter and lens system. Power required: Two 1.5 volt manganese cells Meter switched on by light pressure on shutter release Meter oil by lifting off shutter release. Meter range: EV 3 to EV 18 at ISO 100/21°

FILM ADVANCE AND SHUTTER COCKING: By lever wind on camera body. Lever wind stands oft 28° when in use. Winding stroke is 184°, non-incremental. 120/220 rollfilm selector switch

OTHER: Collapsible-mount bellows extends when camera front is opened. Shutter cocking and release mechanisms and Him advance system are disengaged when the camera front is closed. Features include shutter release lock, film counter, 120/220 pressure plate shift, and flash synch at X. All speeds lor electronic flash. V» and slower for class M flash bulbs 
DIMENSIONS: Folded: 147mmx114mmx54mm. Open: 147mm X114mm x 122mm 
WEIGHT: 820 grams without batteries 
ACCESSORIES: Soft case, lens shade PRICE: $530, suggested list.
I think it was George Bernard Shaw who said thdt it was never safe to be nostalgic until the source of the nostalgia could not possibly return. Well, at this point I am happy to indulge in d little nostalgia because the subject has returned honed and modernized and thoroughly nice in execution and style. Did you ever own a Super Ikonta medium format folding rollfilm camera? If not you missed a treat. The old Super Ikonta was a sweet camera and wds very
popular, in Europe at least, as a general purpose traveling machine. Although it never really pretended to be a professional camera, it did some good service with professional journalists knocking around the globe.

I received a small package from Fuji the other day and found a compact (relatively) folding cdmera—the Fujica GS645 Professional. When I opened the front of the camera it unfolded its bellows and its 75mm f/3.4 Fujinon lens. There was a flash of cfejrb vu, although the real resemblance of the GS645 to that much older camera is largely superficial.

The GS645 is a high-tech folding medium-format camera that offers the user either 15 shots on 120 film or 30 on 220. The 6x4.5-cm negative produces a vertical format with the camera operated horizontally. I have always liked the 15-on-120 format so the battle was half won.

THE FUJICA GS645 PROFESSIONAL There are traveling cameras and traveling cameras. The smallest format I care to employ when I intend to travel light is 35mm—the industry may caterwaul about disc systems as long as it likes. Traveling light requires one to reduce the equipment load to one camera and a very small selection of lenses. Better yet, if you have weaned yourself of your lens addiction (I have a problem there) you travel with a compact fixed-lens camera—auto focus or not, your option. If the idea of 35mm and one lens frightens you a bit, think about a larger format and the convenient sin of being able to use the greater negative area to enlarge out to the equivalent of at least a 90mm lens on 35mm. Enter a camera like to GS645 which has been designated "Professional" by its creators. Why professional? Because of the format? You have me there.

On the other hand there is little doubt that the camera should appeal to a professional photographer who likes to have a camera with him all the time but cannot always heave a full equipment case around.

FEATURES

The camera features a fully coupled rangefinder which permits accurate focusing from infinity right down to 1 meter, with an automatically deflecting bright-line frame in the finder to compensate for parallax. The brighf-line finder accommodates 90 percent of the field of view at infinity and 92 percent at one meter.

The screw-in viewfinder accommodates standard diopter-correction lenses. The rangefinder is the coincident type. To focus you move о lever on the lens, which in turn shifts the coupled rangefinder cams, until the two images merge. Focusing with the rangefinder on the GS645 is quick and smooth. The rangefinder has a base line of 39.5mm with an effective base line of 24.9mm. A depth-of-field scale is provided on the lens mount. The shutter speed setting, the lens aperture setting, and the focus setting all line up with the same engraved red line. The shutter is the Copdl No. 00 mechanical interlens shutter with speeds from 1/кю down to one second, with T, X flash sync, and a noncancellable self-timer.

The winding lever stands off the body at 28° when in use and requires a single 184° sweep to advance the film and cock the shutter. Frame numbers are monitored not through a little orange window on the back but by means of a proper film counter on the camera body top plote. The count is additive. The lens apertures are from f/3.4 to f/22 with no detents. Why no detents? Probably because the GS645 features a coupled but external light meter, and since you generally set the shutter speed and then twiddle the lens aperture ring, it could be said that the system is shutter priority and thus requires a soft moving aperture ring. On the other hand you can set the lens aperture and turn the detented (soft detents) shutter speed dial, in which case the camera is an aperture priority metering system. Let's say that it's manual both ways! The meter will accept films from ISO 25/15° to ISO 1600/33° and couples from EV 3.5 to EV 18, with ISO 100/21° film.

The meter operation is absurdly simple and quite effective. A single GPD located in the viewfinder looks upon the world and reports scene brightness. You put light pressure on the shutter release until the meter circuit switches on, and then turn either the shutter speed or the lens aperture ring until a red LED zero lights up in the finder. There are three LED's in the finder: a zero, which indicotes the correct exposure; a plus sign for overexposure; and a minus sign for underexposure. Considering where it is placed, the meter is not bad, but you do have to get used to it and I would suggest a couple of test rolls to get to know its character. Power for the meter system is supplied by two 1.5-volt olkaline manganese batteries housed in the camera base plate. OTHER FEATURES

Not much has been said so far about the general construction of the GS645. The bodywork is primarily polycarbonate with metal inserts where strategically germane. Finish and design is excellent and the camera, when opened for operation, presents an easy shape to hold comfortably. The front plate, when extended, affords a convenient grip. The camera front cannot be closed when the lens is racked out beyond the infinity setting. This is to prevent damage to the lens and mount system by ham-fisted attempts to force the cover closed. As the front is closed the cocking mechanism and the release mechanisms are automatically disengaged. They are reengaged when the front cover is opened and the bellows extended.

The camera back is held closed by a safety latch, which is pulled down 90° ond then just d tad further to spring the bock open. The interior finish is excellent, with careful attention to even minor details.

Loading the film spools is facilitat-ed by a poir of pop-out spindle caps. Depress the tiny red pins on each side of the film gate and the spool caps and spindles spring downwards, ollowing the spools to be lifted out. Then transfer the empty spool to the take-up side and the full spool to the feed side. Push the caps back in and load by drawing off the paper leader and winding to the start position marked on both the film and the gate of the camera. Once done you simply snap the back closed and move the back latch to its stowed position. The lever wind will now take you to frame number one on the counter.

There is a slide switch that sets the counter to correspond to 120 or 220 film. The camera pressure plate should be shifted before loading to accommodote the thickness of 120 or of 220 film. With 220 you have no paper backing except as a leader and a trailer, so the base plate must come foreword d little more to take up the reduced thickness. The pressure pldte setting is shown on the outside of the back just underneath the film-reminder holder. Flash sync is X and is dvdildble dt either the hot shoe otop the rangefinder housing or a PC cord plug socket on the front of the camera body.

Electronic flash units will synchronize at all shutter speeds. Flash bulbs, for those who just might want to use them, should be the M type and are used at a shutter sync of Vio or less to utilize the full flash burning time. By the by, the flash contacts, that is, hot shoe and PC, are self switching. When one is in use the other is locked out. If your flash unit won't fire, check the polarity of the
contdcts. The center contacts are always positive on the camera.

THE FUJICA GS645 IN USE

The GS645 is light (about 820 grams) and very small when folded up (147x114x56mm to be exact), so it hardly gets in the way. Granted, all bellows type cameras are vulnerable when open, but the Fujica does seem to be quite unconcerned about weather. The camera handles with aplomb and is fdirly fast, although picture-taking is naturally a more thoughtful procedure than working with, say, a winder- or motor-driven 35mm single-lens reflex.

The meter is not too susceptible to unconventional lighting situations, but as the manual suggests, when the light is from the back, side, or top, it helps to shade the viewfinder window with your hand somewhat. Metering is, on the whole, quick and accurate, although I am not quite sure how to describe the GS645's metering pattern. I suppose "well-directed center-weighted" is dn ade-qudte description The Fujinon 75mm f/3.4 lens produces crisp images with good color correction.

The idea of shooting vertical frames with the camera held in a normdl horizontal position may seem a bit odd dt first but you soon get to like it. I had a lot of fun with this comera, I like the images I get with it and I like its compactness. Although a camera of this type cannot possibly serve the needs of dll photographers, especially professionals, the reader might be suprised at how little photographic equipment you actually need when it comes down to it. And as a constant traveling companion, it's a real beauty. 
