Description

Tanaka Kogaku Japan Tanack VP

The Tanack VP is an evolution of the V3, mainly differing by the viewfinder and lens mount. The bayonet mount of the V3 was abandoned, and the VP has an ordinary Leica screw mount. The top cover is slightly higher than on the V3. The finder has a larger window for illumination of the bright frame, as in the Leica M3, including the square second image window for the rangefinder. There is a slot at the rear of the top cover, next to the viewfinder eyepiece, apparently for a magnification or bright frame switch that was planned but never installed. The speed dials have the same geometric progression as on the late Tanack V3, but the top speed is 1/500 only.

The engraving of the Tanack name on the top cover differs from that of the V3. The model name is engraved below, as — VP — with two dashes. The company name Tanaka Optical Co., Ltd. is engraved at the rear of the cover, more to the right than on the V3. The serial number is not engraved on the top cover, and has moved to an unknown location.

The Tanack VP is normally paired with a Tanar 5cm f/1.8 standard lens, that was certainly specifically developed for the new model.

Production and surviving examples
The Tanack VP was never announced or advertised in the press, and was certainly not commercially sold before Tanaka's failure in December 1959.[4] It is said that a few examples were assembled afterwards and somehow reached the market. The development of the camera was perhaps unfinished, as indicated by the unused slot near the viewfinder (see above). According to a repairman that disassembled a surviving camera, the design and build quality of the viewfinder unit was quite poor.

Pictures of two different examples are available. One reportedly has body no.8084 and appears in various books, paired with lens no.82426. The other lacks the rangefinder adjustment screw at the front and is paired with lens no.82325. From this scarce data, it seems that only very few examples were made — surely less than a hundred and perhaps only a handful of prototypes.

