Konica has become the first company to announce an auto-focusing 35mm camera utilizing the Visitronic Auto/Focus (VA/F) module designed by Honeywell. The camera, which Konica plans to market in the spring of 1978, is a modified version of the successful Konica C-35EF, which incorporates automatic exposure and built-in electronic flash, but no rangefinder. The new C35AF retains all the features of the EF and incorporates the auto-focusing module as well.

The module, which measures 16x19x23mm, makes the auto-focusing possible. The system views the subject through two image detectors. When the two images generate maximum correlation, the camera’s computer control makes all the judgements and handles all operations including distance measuring, lens focusing and exposure metering. And amazingly, all these operations are completed in the instant when the shutter is released but before the exposure is made. The device is basically an optical rangefinder with the human eye being replaced by an integrated circuit. It uses a sophisticated optical system and integrated circuit sensor connected to a control device that focuses the camera lens.

In operation the system functions somewhat like a center-weighted metering system in an SLR. An approximate 10 percent delineated area in the center of the finder is placed over the subject one wants to be in focus. When the shutter release is pressed, the sensors measure the distance to that subject by sensing its contrast and command a tiny motor to focus the lens for
Visitronic auto-focus module developed by Honeywell is the key to the new Konica C35AF 35mm camera that focuses automatically. An integrated circuit housed in the module is linked to a mirror system and motor to focus the lens.
the distance. The operation is performed instantly.

In the design of any auto/focus system, one goal is to have the system operate properly with any subject under the widest range of lighting conditions. The Visitronic system has been designed for optimum performance with typical photographic subjects, not necessarily the type of subjects one has to seek out to manually focus a rangefinder or SLR camera. The system response was selected at a relatively low spatial frequency so that even poorly defined subjects can be focused. For example this system can focus on clouds, shadows and illumination gradients—subjects that would be difficult or impossible for manual focus. System response is maximum for subjects such as people and faces, the most
frequently photographed subjects.

In 1975 Honeywell produced a prototype of an auto-focus camera, and 13 manufacturers have signed licensing agreements with Honeywell to use its Visitronic devices. It’s fair to assume that other camera companies will, in time, incorporate the device into their cameras—some of them more sophisticated, even SLRs. For those who think automatic focusing is unnecessary in a sophisticated camera, it should be pointed out that automatic exposure was also considered a waste of time not too many years ago. Konica’s market studies indicate that the number of blurred pictures caused by incorrect focusing has always been surprisingly high, even among sophisticated camera users. Certainly among beginning photographers, who often spend an interminably long amount of time attempting to focus a rangefinder camera or forget entirely to set the proper distance on cameras that lack rangefinders, automatic focusing will be a welcome feature.

The Konica C35AF has a Hexanon 38mm f/2.8 lens and a programmed shutter with three speeds: 1/60, 1/125, 1/250. The exposure meter uses CdS cells and automatically selects shutter speed and aperture. ASA range is 25-400. The pop-up electronic flash automatically selects the correct aperture determined by the auto-focus system. The guide number is 45 with ASA 100 film and recycling time is 6-8 seconds. There are approximately 250 flashes per set of AA alkaline batteries. Konica claims that there is very little increase in size or weight of the C35AF due to the inclusion of the auto-focus system.
