Any single lens reflex, waist level roll film camera with interchangeable backs and finders is certain to be compared to the Hasselblad.

In the basic SQ there is no meter although there is a metering hood available which uses two CdS cells and gives an LED indication of exposure.

The backs available are for 12 21/4ins square (6 x 6cms) on 120 film, 24 on 220 or a Polaroid back for instant images. As with the Hasselblad system the backs have dark slides so they can be changed in mid roll and have their own frame counters so a record of exposures is kept even when the back is off the camera.

The lenses all have their own built-in leaf shutters which means that electronic flash can be synchronised at all shutter speeds, but the control for the speeds is on the camera body. Power for the Seiko electronically controlled shutter is drawn from a single 6v battery in the body. The only speed that is not electronic is 1 /500sec and in the event of power failure that will be delivered whatever the setting on the shutter speed dial. The longest exposure that can be set is 8 secs, but there is a facility for longer settings.

The mirror is not of the instant return type and the screen remains blacked out until the frame is wound on with a turn of the folding lever on the right hand side of the body. At the end of the exposure time an LED on the top front of the camera glows to confirm that it is safe to advance the film, this doubles as the signal for the battery check.
A simple switch above the wind-on lever is used for multiple exposures and disconnects the film advancing mechanism. There is no self timer fitted.

As well as interchangeable viewfinders, with the metering and waist level models there is also a prism finder for eye-level viewing or use at an angle of 45°. The viewing screen can be easily changed with the aid of a pair of tweezers.

This is a fairly new system and the range of accessories and lenses is still growing. So far there are eight lenses available from 40mm to 500mm in focal length, in addition there is a 2X teleconverter to double the length of any of the lenses.

For close-up work there are bellows and extension rings available which have contacts to provide full metering facilities when using the CdS Finder S.

This camera is considerably less awkward to use than the Hasselblad. Although it is roughly the same size and weight as the Swedish standard it feels more compact and has a better control lay-out. Flowever the system is not as extensive and is not fitted with Zeiss lenses. The standard optic is the Bronica 80mm f/2.8 and the results are not nearly as sharp in quality as those from a Zeiss. In fact the results are no better than average - of course the large negative size would prove a help here.

This is a pleasant camera to use and one that will become increasingly popular as the system grows and the optics improve.
