Manufacturer description #1

When you can concentrate on the photograph instead of the camera, you're a photographer! The Rolleiflex SL35 lets you do exactly that. It's one of the simplest, lightest, purest single lens reflex cameras ever made. And certainly one of the best. Its styling and features are functional and at your fingertips so that your eye never needs to leave the viewfinder while you make the adjustments necessary to get a perfect exposure. Light measurement is read right through the lens. The lenses can be changed with one hand! A short quarter-turn releases or sets a lens into the solid bayonet mount. The focal plane shutter provides speeds from 1 second to 1/1000 of a second. And with Rollei's broad system of precision lenses and accessories you can handle just about any specialized photographic situation. Stop into your Rollei Dealer and put this lightweight, precision dream machine into your hands.
Manufacturer description #2

Camera Type: 35mm single-lens reflex camera with interchangeable lenses, instant-return mirror and through-the-Iens exposure meter system.

Picture Format: 24 x 36mm.

Lens Data: Quick-change, Rollei bayonet mount, a famiIy of lenses from 16mm to 200mm in focal length, specially designed by Zeiss and Schneider. New HFT (High Fidelity Transfer) coating available on many lenses.

Shutter: Focal plane with speeds from 1 to 1/1000 sec. and bulb.

Shutter Release: Soft-touch button threaded for cable release.

Self Timer: Up to 12 second delay.

Exposure Control: Through-the-Iens system with CdS meter, center weighted with full field measurement of finder screen image at working aperture; meter needle centered with index in finder, cross-coupled to shutter speed, lens aperture and ASA.

Exposure Meter Battery: Single cell (EPX 625 or equivalent) in camera base, only on during exposure reading actuated by stop- down key near shutter release.

Film Speed Range: ASA 12 to 6400.

Flash Synchronization: X (electronic) to 1/60 sec.; FP (for long delay bulbs) all speeds to 1/1000 sec.

Film Transport: Rapid advance lever with 27° standoff for quick single- or muIti-stroke operation; rapid rewind crank.

Viewfinder Data: Pentaprism with extra bright focusing screen with central microprism grid, matte collar and matte screen with Fresnel field lens; large rectangular finder eyepiece accepts correction lenses and light-blocking cup; 25mm eye relief permits eye-glass wearers to see entire field.

Other Features: Loops for neckstrap; tripod socket 1/4-20 bushing; self zeroing exposure counter.

Accessories: Lenses; lens hoods; fiIters; automatic adapter for M-42 screw mount lenses, M 39 adapter for close-ups with Leica lenses, close-up extension tubes; close-up focusing bellows; Zeiss Softar (soft-focus) I and II attachments; microscope adapter; retro-adapters.

***

A lightweight system SLR with the quality and ruggedness traditional with Rollei. The Rolleiflex SL35 is designed with fuII lens interchangeability and has a complete library of superb bayonet-mount lenses specifically designed for it. It handles quickly, and has all the most important features for professional photography. It combines Rollei mechanical precision, optical quality and elegance of appearance.
Manufacturer description #3

This Rollei design principle led to a 24 x 36mm eye-level reflex with all the basic features essential for successful photography with interchangeable lenses, that is small, light, fast-handling, and easy to operate.

The Rolleiflex SL 35 is not only one of the smallest, lightest, and most elegant miniature reflex cameras on the market today, but it is also a highly versatile "system camera" ready to meet any photographic challenge.

The SL 35 is derived from the same marketing and design concepts which were valid for the trailblazing and successful Rollei 35 compact viewfinder camera. A sensible single-lens reflex with technical precision, attractive design and only those functional elements that are basic to the production of good photographs.

Over fifty years experience in the manufacture of precision units, years of research and development, carefully conceived and tested manufacturing methods, cooperative efforts of firms, such as Gossen, assure a camera which adds further authority to the range of its famous Rollei predecessors.
From the editor

Manufactured 1970 - 06/1972 in Germany, 24.500 units in chrome and black, Singapore from 06/1972 - 12/1976, 118.500 units in chrome and black. Germany: #4.000.000 - #4.029.999; Singapore: #4.030.000 - #4.499.999. QBM bayonet I.

***

When the Rolleiflex SL35 appeared for the market in February 1970, it was already a dated camera from some points of view because Rollei designers had a limited budget and no time enough to add more features, it did not offer open aperture TTL metering, it was necessary to press a dedicated stop down button at the camera top to take the readings and the SL35 did not have an accesories shoe from factory, it was only optional; the viewfinder could be better. In spite of these drawbacks, the SL35 was a very well built camera, elegant and easy to use with very good ergonomics. It became the beginning for a camera system manufactured almost for 25 years based on the Rollei Quick Bayonet Mount (QBM) and different bodies, including the Voigtländer cameras made by Rollei.