Manufacturer description #1

Rollei defines precision

Precision is a quality you can hear and feel in the new Rolleiflex SL35M 35mm SLR. The uniquely competent sound when you release the shutter. The instant-return mirror is virtually silent and vibration free. The silken smoothness of the perfectly finished Rollei quick-change bayonet mount when you interchange lenses. The positive response of the winding mechanism as you advance the film. The Rollei SL35M offers you painstaking German design and a standard of precision that few cameras can match.

This latest model comes with a new rugged look as standard equipment. Professional black, of course, with a sure-grip surface on the camera body for easy handling. Inside, there's full-aperture metering for precise, convenient exposure control.

The new SL35M offers the features the demanding photographer wants. A large, extra-bright finder with exposure indicators, lens f/stop readout and a diagonal split-image rangefinder with microprism grid and groundglass collar, for positive eye-level control... a short-stroke rapid advance lever does double duty as the meter switch... and a host of other niceties you expect to be standard on a camera with the Rollei name.

Equally essential, equally precise, is the Rollei 35mm SLR system, including bellows, automatic extension tubes, lens adapters, microscope adapter, filters, hoods, cases and most especially the lenses themselves. Focal lengths from 16mm through 200mm, all equipped for full-aperture metering. They are among the finest optics made in the world today... each distinguished by the appelation HFT: High Fidelity Transfer. Multi-layer coating, floating elements, sophisticated electronic testing techniques.

The result: increased image contrast, light transmission, and color saturation.

This, too, is precision. It is a word synonymous with Rollei, now given new expression by the Rolleiflex SL35M.
Manufacturer description #2

Type

24 x 36 mm single lens reflex camera with exposure measurement through the lens at open aperture.

Features

Rollei bayonet mount for interchangeable lenses, accessory shoe with centre contact, focal plane shutter with rubber blinds and rapid winding, double exposure and blank frame lock, self-locking stop-down pin, selftimer with starting button, cable-release thread, self-zeroing exposure counter with film loading control, 1/4 inch tripod bushing, carrying strap eyelets.

Exposure measurement

Through-the-lens system with CdS cells, centerweighted full-field measurement of finder screen image; optional open aperture measurement or working aperture measurement. Self-locking film speed setting from 25 to 3200 ASA / 15 to 36 DIN, measuring range with 50 mm f/1.8 lens and 100 ASA / 21 DIN film from 1 to 16,000 cd/m2, meter needle centred with index in finder. Powered by button cell 1.35 V in camera bottom, switched on by rapid winding lever.

Finder system

Pentaprism, instant return mirror. Focusing screen with diagonal focus indicator, microprism ring and ground-glass screen with Fresnel lens. Aperture indication, measuring range limit indication. Finder eyepiece with fitting for eyepiece cup and correction lens. Laterally correct and parallax-free finder image.

Focal plane shutter

Shutter speeds 1/1000 to 1/2 second and B with longtime exposure indication; X and FP switch-over flash synchronization at 1/40 second for centre contact and cable contact.

***

A new 35mm single-lens reflex camera design with the famous Rolleiflex name and quality. Distinctive contours and black finish express its ruggedness and professional performance. Rollei bayonet mount for easy and quick lens changing. Match needle exposure system with fast full-aperture metering. Hot shoe with X synchronization. The Rolleiflex SL35M allows full scope to the creative photographer.
From the editor

Rolleiflex SL35 M: Manufactured 04/1976 - 1979 in Singapore, 63.800 units in black only. #4.700.000 - #4.899.999 and coded. QBM bayonet III.

Voigtländer VSL 1: Manufactured 12/1975 - 1979 in Singapore, 20.800 units in black only. #4.700.000 - #4.799.999 and coded. QBM bayonet III.

The weight and dimensions are indicated for the camera body with the Carl Zeiss Planar HFT 50mm F/1.8 lens mounted.