Manufacturer description #1

Type

24 x 36 mm single lens reflex camera with automatic speed control and manual override operating by aperture pre-selection and exposure measurement through the lens at full aperture.

Features

Rollei bayonet mount for interchangeable lenses, accessory shoe with centre contact, rapid film loading system, focal plane shutter with rubber blinds, rapid winding and release lock, double exposure and blank frame lock, self-locking stop-down pin, backlight correction button integrated in shutter release, self timer with starting button, cable release thread, forward-counting self-zeroing exposure counter with film loading and film rewind control, 1/4 inch tripod bushing, carrying strap eyelets.

Exposure measurement

Through-the-lens system with silicon photo diode, center-weighted full field measurement; according to lens type open aperture measurement or working aperture measurement. Film speed setting from 25-3200 ASA / 15-36 DIN, measuring range with 100 ASA / 21 DIN film from 1-16,000 cd/m2 with 50 mm f/1.8 lens; automatic electronic shutter control with aperture preselection, powered by 4 x 1.5 V silver oxide batteries in camera base, switched on by rapid winding lever and shutter speed dial, double switch-on indication.

Viewfinder system

Pentaprism, instant return mirror. Focusing screen with diagonal focus indicator, microprism ring and ground glass screen with Fresnel lens. Aperture indication, shutter speed indication, top and bottom setting range limit indication, time exposure warning mark; LED green signal as automatic and memory measurement indication, LED red signal as setting range limit and indication of aperture stop down pin position; battery voltage check indication. Viewfinder eyepiece with mask and fitting for eyepiece cup and correction lens. Laterally correct and parallax-free finder image.

Focal plane shutter

Automatically controlled shutter speeds 1/1000 - 4 sec, mechanically set shutter speed 1/1000 - 1/30 sec and B; selectable X and FP flash synchronization at 1/40 second for hot shoe and flash cord terminal.
Manufacturer description #2

Now Voigtlander is back, combining its unmatched engineering know-how with the largest, most modern production facilities anywhere in the world. The result in an array of fine camera products, superbly designed and engineered, yet brought to you at refreshingly moderate prices!

Seldom is a camera maker able to introduce a complete new system, ready and available, all at once. Yet, that is exactly what is awaiting you at your camera dealer, from Voigtlander. And not just a camera and a few accessories. A Voigtlander System, encompassing two 35mm slr cameras - your choice of match-needle metering or full electronic automation - an array of the finest optics the world has to offer, and a complete selection of system accessories.

The Voigtlander VSL-2 is a brand new automatic with the accuracy of electronic automation. Set the lens. Automatically, the electronically-controlled shutter, stepless from 4 seconds through 1/1000, adjusts itself for correct exposure. Green and red LED indicators in the finder keep you fully informed. All these and many more features are standard in the VSL-2, and priced far below any other, comparably equipped automatic. In the Voigtlander VSL-1, you can enjoy many of the same features, with match-needle exposure control. The VSL-1, like the automatic VSL-2 accepts the same great Voigtlander lenses, 25mm through 200mm... with more to come. These very special optics are fully multi-coated. Their resolution, contrast and overall quality compare with the finest optics in photography, regardless of price. They are offer full-aperture viewing and metering, and are surprisingly light and compact. Bayonet mounts permit instant interchange. There is also a complete system of other accessories, including automatic extension tubes and bellows, even a microscope adapter.
From the editor

The SL35 M and ME have identical body shape. The letter "E" means that the camera has electronically controlled shutter.

Rolleiflex SL35 ME: Manufactured 09/1976 – 1979 in Singapore, 32.900 units in black only, #4.900.000 - #4.999.999 and coded. QBM bayonet III.

Voigtlander VSL 2 automatic: Manufactured 09/1976 - 1979 in Singapore, 8.100 units in black only. #4.900.000 - #4.999.999 and coded. QBM bayonet III.

The weight and dimensions are indicated for the camera body with the Carl Zeiss Planar HFT 50mm F/1.8 lens mounted.