New Agfacolors make a bid for bright, natural hues

By Martin Herstienson, James Mancini, Kenny Yamamoto and Tony Galluzzo

Remember “European color”?

That was the curious and intriguing term Agfa embraced a few years back to describe its color films.

And the film did provide a sense of what Agfa wished to convey: the golden glow of what we imagine a European afternoon to be like. Maybe in late fall. Unfortunately, not every photograph is taken in late fall, nor are we all bound for points across the pond.

With this in mind, Agfa chemists have come around to a more international flavor in their current batch of color negative emulsions. There is still a good hint of the warmer hues, but this has certainly been toned down and balanced out by an increase in both sharpness and contrast.

What are we left with in the new Agfacolor XRC 100 and 200 print films? First of all, the colors in these Agfacolors are bolder and more saturated than ever before. Not only are the reds deeper, as you can see in our results, but the cooler shades of blue, green and cyan come off very respectably. This is due to new advances in DIR (Developer Inhibitor Releasing) couplers in the film layers that help contain color drift. Red is thus less contaminated by green and blue, for instance.

There is also an obvious improvement in sharpness over previous Agfacolors.

To achieve this, Agfa chemists actually use less silver in the image-forming layer and an overall tighter grain pattern. A decrease in the film’s thickness also plays a part in this; so does an improvement in edge effect, producing a slightly higher contrast than before.

If you’re wondering how these films fare under extremely short and long exposures, here’s how they stand: you can expose from '/.coco second to 100 seconds, without corrective filters to compensate for reciprocity failure.

To top things off (literally), the gelatin has been toughened up to reduce scratches on the film surface.

So there you have it. The new Agfacolors get high marks for purer and deeper colors, improved sharpness and contrast and overall tonality. If you’re in the market for good, bright color, the Agfa’s have it!

Skin tones: Overall color pleasing but cool; more natural in our print than Agtacolor 100. Highlight, shadow detail good; bracelets more vibrant, snappier overall than Kodacolor 200.
Color reproduction: Red deeper than Agfacolor 100; vibrant green with other colors comparable to Agfacolor 100.
Grain and sharpness: At 30X, lash detail is adequate, grain increases here, but pattern remains fairly smooth.
	
