The recent introduction of the Polaroid 600 system of photography has made instant picture taking easier and given better results than ever before. The combination of a higher film speed, equivalent to 600ASA and the built-in fill-in flash produces first class shots taken under bright sunlight at the press of a button.

This model has built-in auto focus which uses the sonar or echo ranging method. This also combines with the Silicon metering cell to calculate the correct amount of flash required for a 3:1 flash ratio. This means that any harsh shadows cast by the sun, or loss of detail due to back light will be filled in.

At first it may seem strange firing a flash under the mid-day sun but once the results are seen all doubts will disappear. For normal indoor flash work the camera is used like any other and all exposure is automatic.

The film pack looks very similar to an SX-70 but is not interchangeable. In practice the results seem to take a little longer to develop fully but it is still very quick. The ejection of the exposed sheet is motorised after exposure and the only requirement from the user is patience while the image slowly appears and darkens over about one and a half minutes.

The flash range is from two to 14 feet. Before use it must be charged, this is done by a first pressure on the shutter release button. Whilst this is happening a red warning light glows through a small cut-out window just below the viewfinder eyepiece. As full charge is reached, the typical ‘electronic flash whistle’ changes tone and the warning light goes out.

Should flash not be required, when shooting a distant landscape, for instance, where the flash would
have no effect, a second shutter release behind the main one should be used. The main release cannot be fired until the flash is charged.

Charging of the flash takes five seconds and this is held for several minutes. When not in use the flash unit folds down over the main body.

On the front of the camera is a darken/lighten control which will change the exposure by up to % of a stop in either direction. For the first time on a Polaroid camera there is viewfinder indication when this control is in use, saving on wasted shots.

The sonar auto focusing reflects from the centre of the frame and will read what is there. This will be any solid object so if shooting through a window it would focus itself on the glass rather than the scene beyond. There is an override control to overcome this which will set the camera to its hyperfocal distance, giving focus from infinity to a close distance in the style of the point and shoot camera.

There are four focusing zones available between two feet and infinity, the most appropriate of which is selected by the camera itself.

In practice it is almost impossible to get a bad shot using this camera. The electronics calculate everything including the focus, the degree of available light, the amount of flash required to fill in the main subject and finally delivers them all at the press of a button in just 90 seconds.

For straightforward instant picture taking this is quite simply the best camera available and has a great deal to offer all photographers from the beginner to the real enthusiast.
