This is a true point and shoot camera with the user requiring no more skill than the ability to press the shutter release button. Once that is done the shot is ejected by the built-in motor and the Supercolor print develops before the user’s eye. This takes a minute or so but the thrill of seeing the shot slowly appear, darken and richen never really wears off.

In design it has a low and flat appearance. Holding the camera so that the hands do not get in the way of the lens and the camera remains steady is simple. The left hand forms a base on which the camera is placed, this is also used to grip, the right hand is then free to give support and the index finger used for the shutter release.

A fair proportion of any instant pictures will be taken using flash indoors. Flashbars or the Polatronic 1 electronic flash gun can be fitted to the top of this camera for those occasions.

A Supercolor film pack has 10 sheets of instant material and is protected by a stiff dark slide. The whole pack is slid into the base of the camera and the hatch opening closed. The dark slide is then ejected by the camera’s motor and all is ready for the first shot.

The frame counter on this, as on other Polaroid cameras, is subtractive and shows how many frames remain in the pack rather than the number of shots that have been taken.

The fixed focus 103mm lens has two apertures, f/14.6 for flash work and f/18 when using ambient, or available light. This allows a very good depth of field
and ensures all but the closest of subjects are rendered sharp.

Exposure is controlled by the shutter speed, this runs between 1 and 1/125sec depending on the lighting conditions at the time. This can be overriden by up to three stops by using the lighten/darken control on the front of the body. When this has been used the photographer, must remember to return it to the neutral position as there is no reminder on the camera.

The camera comes complete with a neck strap for easy carrying and its low weight means that even a young child can carry it around all day with no strain. Polaroid makes several useful accessories including a self timer, so that you can include yourself in the shot, a cable release, a tripod mount, for those occasions when using a longer shutter speed and a carrying case.

The motor can keep up with shots at the rate of one every one and half seconds. Power for this is provided by the flat battery which is included in the film pack. This means that not only is there always a full charge available but the cost of a film pack represents all the running costs of the camera.

Results from this camera are first rate giving a sharp, almost grain-free result with good colour saturation and balance. For a child or first time photographer this is an ideal camera. The results are pleasing and no technical skill or knowledge is required.
