Sharpshooter

Kodak’s Ektar 25 launches a new era for color print film

By Martin Hershenson, Kenny Yamamoto,

James Mancini, Peter Moore and Tony Galluzzo

Why quibble about it?

Kodak Ektar 25 is the sharpest color negative film made. It amazed us after we viewed our quick, on-the-spot shots taken in Cologne, Germany, where the film was introduced at Photokina in October and it continues to impress after our controlled tests for this article.

Kodak Ektar is so fine, in fact, that we yielded to the temptation of comparing it to a fine-grain 120-format emulsion. The result? Ektar 25 certainly gives the larger format a run for its money, as you can see in the accompanying photos. But whether the new film is really good enough to replace 120 on a professional shoot is another matter, one that should be left to the individual photographer and the demands of the particular job he’s working on. Each assignment dictates its own needs, after all, and we should be concerned not only with sharpness but also with granularity, contrast, color rendition and the ability of a film to hold fine detail and visual information in the shadow areas of the image.

The new film, which will shortly be available — and only in 35mm format — is intended more for the serious amateur than the pro, according to Kodak. A professional version, which will debut later this year, will feature all of the same fine characteristics. But, regardless of the end-user, this is definitely a niche product for high-rolling, premium-SLR camera-owners. To our minds, it’s a perfect film for the “think before you shoot," dedicated 35mm photographer. Point-and-shooters need not apply. Even if point-and-shoot cameras contained ISO 25 settings, they do not lend themselves to the careful, thoughtful approach required by this film.

To get the most out of Ektar 25, you should start with super-sharp lenses, used at medium-to-small apertures; shoot in plenty of light and think seriously about a tripod or other support. That last may scare away all but the most ardent seekers of that elusive thing called “sharpness” we always talk about. On the other hand, shooting Ektar 25 is no more difficult than using Kodachrome 25.

Why did Kodak come up with this dazzling new film at this time, just when Kodak's own VR Gold 100 and some other makers’ 100-speed neg films are more than acceptable for general pic ture-taking? One answer would be to advance the art of 35mm image-making and show the world how far ahead silver halide technology—and Kodak’s mastery of it—is compared to any electronic attempt. Another reason? Profit. Kodak's net is up this year, and the company intends to keep going in that direction. Ektar 25 will retail for about 15 percent more than VR Gold—and the premium will be well worth it if photographers obtain the virtually grainless enlargements that Ektar 25 promises.

Did we say “grainless?” if you look at our 30X enlarged eye segment, you can’t help but wonder where the grain went. Hardly any is discemable in the Ektar 25 compared to the 30X enlargements of the 120 frame, due to Kodak's use of a combination of T-grains and cubic emulsions.

T-grains provide thinner silver layers to reduce light scatter and maintain sharpness. Special dyes are also employed toward the same end. The cubic grains are combined with the T-grains to maintain the film’s sensitivity to light. Very briefly, here’s the composition: the green-sensitive layer is totally T-grain; blue-sensitive, a combination of T-grain and cubic; and the red layer is made up of entirely cubic silver grains. DIAR (Developer Inhibitor and Anchemeric Releasing) couplers work toward edge enhancement, making the edges appear darker, thus sharper.

If Kodak can make a 35mm negative film of such refinement that it even rivals exnaited Kodachrome 25, can it put the same technology to work on a 100-speed negative film for nearly-grainless images? No doubt, but let’s not get ahead of the game. Ektar 25 is here and now—so when the light shines bright, pull out a roll and take your best shots. Then see if you can count the grains.
