CANON EOS 650: DAWN OF A NEW AUTOFOCUS SLR GENERATION

MANUFACTURER’S SPECIFICATIONS: Canon EOS autofocus 35mm single lens reflex camera. Body No.1009323. LENS: 50mm f/1.8 EF Canon In Canon EF bayonet mount. SHUTTER: Electronically controlled vertical travel Canon metal-coated Mylar blade focal plane with speeds from 30 to 1/2000 sec. plus B. EXPOSURE SYSTEMS: Segmented silicon photo cell above eyepiece reads evaluative or central limited area metering pattern with lock, for shutter priority, aperture priority, program (based on lens focal length), calculated depth-of-fleld autoexposure programs plus metered manual exposure. Second SPO in bottom of mirror box provides centerweighted, off-the-film readings for TTL autoflash. EV range 1-20 at IS0100. Autofocus: Focus-priority AF or continuous (servo) AF using TTL phase detection with Canon BASIS sensor In bottom of mirror box, audible focus OK signal, EV 1-18. Lowlight autofocus aid flash provided by Canon 420/300 EZ flash units when fitted. FLASH: Flve-pIn dedicated hot shoe provides TTL flash off film surface with aperture and shutter speed predetermined by near Infrared pre-exposure flash when using 420/300EZ Canon flash units, 1/60-1/125 X-sync speeds. Flash units have focus aid lights and auto power zooming heads. VIEWFINDER: Fixed eye-level prism with user-changeable finder screens. Standard screen has central autofocus'rectangle, indicating circle for limited area metering and full area manual focus. LED-llt LCD display shows shutter speed, aperture, metered manual exposure level, depth-of-fleld program indications, AE lock, manual exposure Indicator, flash ready, exposure compensation, autofocus Indication, out of exposure and flash range warning signals. OTHER FEATURES: LCD on top plate displays shooting mode, film wind condition, AF mode, shutter speed, aperture, film speed, battery check. Auto DX film speed setting ISO 25-5000, manual ISO 6-6400, autoload, autowind, autorewind, single and sequence film advance, electronic self-timer with LED, depth-of-fleld preview, mid-roll rewind-provision, audible camera shake warning, provision for accessory data and command backs, interchangeable grips with or without remote control terminal. BATTERIES: All power supplied by single 6-volt lithium battery. PRICE: $505.00. Eleven years ago, Canon unveiled a series of electronically controlled cameras that
was destined to redefine the 35mm SLR and to position Canon at the cutting edge of photographic technology. Canon’s A-series SLRs, including the phenomenally successful AE1 and the remarkably advanced A-1, paved the pathway all manufacturers would shortly follow in developing the single lens reflex camera. During the early 80s, Canon did anything but rest on its corporate laurels. The company aggressively evolved the fully computerized, ever-more automated, ergonomically styled "SLRs of the 90s,” best exemplified by the T-70 with its computerlike controls and LCD readouts and the recent T-90, a masterpiece of integrated electrpnics with a dazzling array of exposure control systems and TTL autoflash capabilities.

Perhaps the only area where Canon elected not to concentrate the full force of its prodigious energies was the autofocus (AF) SLR. Given the technological and marketing realities of the late 70s and early 80s, this was understandable. The world's first true autofocus SLR, the Pentax ME-F, was an indifferent performer that bombed in the marketplace. Canon’s own focus-assist model, the AL-1, worked better, but having a focus OK LED was not perceived as a great advance over traditional manual focusing. The one available autofocus optic for Canon SLRs, the square-bodied 35-70mm f/2.8 Canon with AF sensors and bulky motor in the lens, was an expensive and ungainly option.

When Minolta unleashed the Maxxum 7000 in 1985, Canon, along with every other Japanese camera maker, was jolted into the realization that the Autofocus SLR Age was indeed upon us. Minolta had had the foresight to conclude that it was poor execution, not the basic concept, that had prevented existing autofocus SLRs from being successful. Clearly they had done their homework in developing the first integrated autofocus SLR system worthy of the name.

Canon’s initial response to the Maxxum was the T-80, an autofocus SLR that was basically an AF version of the entry-level automatic Canon T-50. It provided through-the-lens autofocus with a limited number of Canon AF lenses with motors built in, and focus confirmation with traditional Canon FD lenses. Unfortunately neither its AF performance nor its features were on a par with Maxxum’s. It was a stopgap camera, as Canon knew only too well.

Canon was now determined to reaffirm its position of technological leadership by developing a first-class AF SLR system, but they knew it would take time. Pride spurred them to the oft-stated goal of producing "a better system than you-know whose," but even with Canon’s phenomenal human and technical resources it took them two years to deliver it "on schedule." Is the new Canon EOS system truly better? Does it provide
real-world advantages over the half dozen or so other AF SLR systems now on the market? Let's examine the EOS 650, the "broad spectrum" model first brought to market, to see how well it has attained these lofty goals.

Where did Canon ever come up with a name like EOS, you ask? There are two alternative explanations, depending on whether you’re an electronics buff or a classical romantic. If you're the former, EOS simply stands for "Electro-Optical System." More poetic souls may prefer to think of EOS as the ancient Greek goddess of the dawn.

in appearance, the EOS 650 bears an unmistakable resemblance to the Canon T-90, though its contours are less radically futuristic and curvilinear. It's a largish, handsome-looking camera finished in an attractive combination of smooth and sanded-texture black polycarbonate, with a nearly black, rubberized material on the removable right-hand finger grip and the non-removable thumbrest area on the right side of the back. Pick the 650 up and bring it to eye level and you'll immediately discover one of its sterling virtues even before you turn it on—it's extremely comfortable to hold and has a superbly balanced feel. The large, very soft rubber eye-cup is equally comfy and it excludes light effectively.

Press in the forward-facing lens release button at the left of the 50mm f/1.8 EF Canon lens while you turn the barrel about 60° counter-clockwise, then lift the lens off. The EF (electronic signal transfer system) stainless steel bayonet mount measures a huge 54mm in diameter and it’s firmly affixed to the diecast aluminum main body with four hefty screws. At the bottom of the mirror box, just inboard of the mount itself, is an array of eight spring-loaded gold-plated contacts, which mate with seven flat gold-plated contacts on the backs of the lenses (presumably one contact is reserved for future use). The only mechanical linkage, if you can call it that, is a tiny spring-loaded button at 3 o’clock position in the mount, which retracts when you push in the lens release button or mount a lens. It's a simple switch, which turns on the camera's AF and exposure circuitry when the lens is in place. In effect, the Canon EF mount is the first totally electronic mount on a 35mm SLR.

But if there are no mechanical pins, linkages or keyways on either body or lens, how does the camera physically focus the lens and stop down the lens diaphragm? Answer: By sending signals to the AFD (Arc Form Drive)—a modified, brushless, Hall effect AF motor arranged in the form of an arc—and the EMD (Electro-Magnetic Diaphragm) motor built into most Canon EF lenses. Instead of putting the focusing motor and aperture control system in the body as virtually every other manufacturer has done, Canon's engineers developed tiny, high-efficiency micromotors that fit inside the lens barrel without altering its traditional round shape. The motors are so small and light that the size and weight of EF lenses are virtually no greater than those of competitive motorless lenses with comparable speed and focal length.

Claimed advantages of Canon's system: Motor characteristics more closely matched to each lens, elimination of linkages for improved energy efficiency, decreased inertia of smaller parts, providing faster, more accurate focusing and f/stop setting, and quieter operation, especially focusing. Whether or not all these claimed benefits will be evident in comparing the EOS to its rivals is an open question. However, the camera’s focusing and exposure accuracy are commendable, and it's definitely the quietest-focusing AF SLR we’ve tested.

Special miniature motors are far from the only high tech elements to be found in Canon's unique autofocusing system. The most basic is the AF sensor in the body, which is not the usual CCD array but a Canon-developed, Canon-manufactured sensor called BASIS (for Base Stored Image Sensor). While the BASIS system focuses by means of phase detection just like CCD-sensor systems, the BASIS sensor contains 48 cells, each with its own individual amplifier circuit. So, instead of reading the amplified output of a chip as a single electronic value, each element of the chip can be individually monitored and compared with the overall reading. Claimed advantage: Greatly improved signal-to-noise ratio resulting in noticeably better low light performance—down to EV 1 at ISO 100 (see chart on page 8 for our test results).

Yet another technological coup is the computing power built into the EF lenses themselves. While AF lenses from other makers incorporate ROM (read only memory) chips containing fixed information such as basic lens specs, Canon EF lenses have, in addition, two microprocessors on board, one for power control, the other for calculating and control of lens functions. This system permits two-way communication between the body and the lens. And Canon claims it enables more complex information to be processed more swiftly, resulting in quicker focusing, especially under adverse conditions

Although the EOS 650 offers an impressive number of modes and controls—indeed, few SLRs are endowed with more user-selectable options—they are so logically set forth that they’re easy to learn and hard to forget once you've used them. To set the most basic operational modes, turn the main switch, a knurled knob to the left of the eyecup, to one of four click-stopped set-
tings. To select exposure modes or compensation, maintain finger pressure on the Mode or Exp. Comp button to the left of the pentaprism housing while turning the knurled electronic input dial (it's behind the angled electromagnetic shutter relase atop the hand grip) with your right index finger until the proper mode indication appears on the large, top-mounted LCD panel. Less commonly made settings (e.g. mid-roll rewind, AF and film wind modes, manually keyed ISO and battery check) are made by pushing buttons concealed behind a hinged flap on the back of the camera, near the bottom. Once you push the button(s) (except the rewind button, which initiates power rewinding the instant you press it) you have 8 sec. to turn the electronic input dial to effect the setting you want, which is then displayed briefly on the LCD panel.

Now that you understand the main control systems let’s run through the options they provide. With the main switch at L (lock), all power circuits are turned off, except that the LCD panel still displays the frame number and film loaded status. Turn the dial about 80° counter-clockwise to the green rectangle detent and you’re in full auto mode, the basic setting for those who “just want to take pictures" or don’t want to figure out how to get out of whatever mode they’re in. It's the equivalent of the return-to-basic-settings or “panic button" found on other AF SLRs. Select full auto and you’ll automatically be in single shot AF mode, programmed exposure mode, and single shot film-wind .mode with the beeper turned on. Unlike “reset buttons," when the EOS is in this mode your manual choices are somewhat restricted— more on this a bit later.

The electronic beeper sounds two short beeps the instant the AF system has attained proper focus (and a series of longer beeps as a camera shake warning at slow shutter speeds—below about one over the focal length of the lens in use). The exposure program is an intelligent program because the lens remains wide open as the light level increases until a shutter speed of one over the focal length of the lens in use (or up to
0.5 EV below that) has been attained.

In the full auto mode the LCD panel shows a P at the top for program mode, One Shot in the film-wind box, S (for single shot) in the AF mode box, plus frame number and film loading status. If you set the focus mode switch near the top of the lens barrel to M (manual focus) instead of AF, the focus mode box on the LCD displays M.FOCUS and the beeper remains silent or emits a distinctive uneven beep when you press the shutter release partway in to focus. Slide the switch to AF, bring the camera to eye level and press the very smooth shutter release until you feel slight resistance and the camera will focus on whatever is in the clearly marked AF "brackets" in the central area of the finder screen (presuming it has sufficient detail and contrast and the camera-selected aperture and shutter speed (both in half stops if necessary) are displayed in yellow-green transilluminated LCD digits below the finder screen. To the right of this panel is a round LED of the same color that lights continuously when the subject is in focus or flashes rapidly if the subject cannot be properly focused.

When you're in the full auto mode, you cannot select Servo (continuous) AF, C (continuous) film wind, partial (limited central area) metering, exposure compensations or any other mode except for manual focusing if needed—a good safety feature for tyros. The finder readouts are outstanding—clearly visible in any light, or in total darkness for that matter. They remain on for about 8 sec. when you touch the shutter button, and the numbers will change to suit the lighting conditions if you move the camera without touching the shutter release. However when you press the release partway in with the camera set to “One Shot" AF, the camera-selected exposure will be locked in the instant the camera attains the correct focus, as long as you maintain pressure on the release. This occurs in any exposure or film-wind mode and it allows you to recompose with the in-focus subject off center. Follow through with your shutter finger to take the shot.
The two remaining settings on the main power switch are A (on, beeper off) and a “dot-in-brackets” setting (on, with beeper enabled). To set either, turn the dial clockwise off L to the appropriate detent. If you've just been in full auto mode, you’ll now be at the same basic settings when you switch to A or Beep, but at either of these positions you can now select the full range of exposure, metering, focusing, and film-wind modes. Press in the Mode button while turning the Electronic Input dial clockwise and its successive detents correspond to Tv (time value or shutter-preferred autoexposure), Av (aperture value, or aperture-preferred AE) and DEPTH, the automatic depth-of-field-setting mode (which we'll get to a bit later)—all of which are displayed atop the LCD panel. Turn the input dial one detent counter-clockwise off P and you're at M, the metered manual exposure mode. When you're in any of these modes (except DEPTH), open the button compartment on the back of the camera and you can change focusing and film wind modes or manually change ISO/ASA film speed settings by pressing the appropriate buttons and turning the input dial. Only the black battery check and mid-roll rewind buttons are operable in all modes except L.

To switch to servo AF, for example, press the yellow AF button and all LCD panel displays except the focus mode box turn off for about 8 sec. If, during that time, you turn the input dial, the display will switch from ONE SHOT to SERVO alternately as you turn the dial to successive detents. In One Shot mode the shutter will not fire until proper focus has been attained unless the lens is set to manual focus. Once the green focus OK LED in the finder lights, the beeper sounds two short beeps and the exposure is locked in as mentioned. In Servo mode, the camera will continuously focus to track a moving subject and you can release the shutter at any time, even if proper focus has not been attained. The exposure is now determined at the instant before the shutter fires, when you press the shutter release all the way in to take the shot.

In bright light in Servo mode, the EOS 650 autofocuses with commendable speed. For example, when you’re using the normal lens, it can track a jogger moving at “average speed" toward the camera and keep him in focus until less than half his body fills the frame. We found the performance to decrease only marginally in lower light, providing the moving subject has sufficient contrast and detail. As expected, autofocus-ing on a moving subject becomes more difficult as its speed increases, its distance to the camera decreases, and as its angle to the film plane approaches 180°. Nevertheless, the EOS’ on-film performance with really fast subjects like auto racers and base runners is remarkably good, certainly better than average, compared to other AF SLRs. So long as there is sufficient depth of field to cover minor focusing errors, the servo mode will provide reasonably sharp focus with all but the most difficult subjects, and will certainly outperform most humans. When you consider that the EOS focuses its 50mm f/1.8 lens from infinity to 18 in. in 0.56 sec. and its 35-105mm from infinity to 34 in. in 0.85 sec. at the 105mm setting, this should come as no great surprise.

To select film-wind modes press the blue button in the button compartment next to the
yellow AF button and all LCD readouts turn off except those in-the film-wind box. You now have 8 sec. to turn the input dial, which sets S (single frame), C (continuous run) or a clock symbol (for self-timer) at successive detents. In S mode the shutter will release once and the motor will advance the film one frame each time you press the shutter release. In C mode you can shoot bursts at 3 frames per sec. if you keep the shutter release pressed in. You'll get a slower framing rate if the shutter speed you're shooting at is too slow (say, below 1/30 sec.) or if you're in single shot AF mode, and the camera must achieve proper focus before the shutter fires. In bright light, with a moving but focu-sable subject kept within the AF frame, your framing rate will typically be about 2 fps.

One rather strange feature of the C mode is that all finder displays go out the instant the shutter first fires and remain out for the entire sequence until you let go of .the shutter release and press it partway in again. If the light changes, or if you point the camera in another direction while firing continuously, the camera will continue to adjust to provide the proper exposure—as you can readily see by monitoring the LCD panel—but you'll get no indication of this in the finder. What’s more, the focus OK LED stays out, and the beeper remains silent even when a non-hand-holdable shutter speed is automatically selected. We can appreciate that the most important thing when shooting sequences is to keep the subject properly framed in the finder, and distractions such as beeps and flashing LEDs can prove annoying, but we see no practical reason for depriving sequence shooters of exposure readouts.
Those little buttons in the hinged-cover compartment let you do two more things in conjunction with the LCD panel—manually key in film speeds and check the battery. To set the ISO of a non-DX cartridge or to override the DX speed and set one of your own, press the yellow and blue buttons simultaneously and only the set ISO will appear on the LCD panel. You now have 8 sec. to turn the input dial to set film speeds from ISO 6-6400 (DX settings cover ISO 25-5000). To check the condition of the 6-volt lithium battery pack, press and hold in the black battery check button on the extreme right and check the LCD panel, which will display BC above the AF mode box and one or more dashes at the bottom, toward the right. Three dashes mean you've got sufficient battery power, two mean you should have a fresh battery handy, one means that battery exhaustion is imminent, and a flashing dash or no display at all means you should replace the battery immediately.

Changing the battery is a pretty simple procedure if you have a coin (a quarter will do nicely). Turn the coin-slotted fastener on the right-hand side of the grip about four turns counter-clockwise and lift the grip off (notice that the shutter button and input dial surround above it are integral parts of the body). You can now see the battery nestled lengthwise in its little compartment at the bottom of the main body. Push the orange plastic retainer up out of the way and tilt the camera so that its right side points downward and the battery will slide out. The new battery slides in just as easily, but it will fit wrong way round. Make sure to install it with its silver terminals pointing inward, toward the back of the battery compartment, and to push it in against spring tension until the retainer comes down to hold it in place; then replace the grip. Speaking of grips, Canon offers two alternatives to the standard GR30 grip—-the GR20, which is the same size but has a remote control terminal, and the GR10, a large-size, no-terminal grip for big hands.

All the exposure modes available through the A or Beep main switch settings operate in a most straightforward and logical way. In P mode the camera automatically selects aperture and shutter speed and reads them out simultaneously on the LCD panel for about 8 sec. if you press the release partway and then let go. If the lighting or subject changes during this period, the readouts change to indicate the proper camera-selected exposure. If the maximum aperture and slowest shutter speed (30") numbers in the finder blink simultaneously, the camera is warning you of potential underexposure, and you should use a tripod or flash, or increase the illumination. If the fastest shutter speed (1/2000 sec.) and minimum aperture numerals blink, the camera is warning you of overexposure and you should use an ND filter or move the subject to a darker location if possible. If the beeper is turned on, long beeps will signal underexposure, but not overexposure.

Press the mode button and turn the input dial to select shutter priority (Tv) mode and the shutter speed will automatically be set to 1/125 sec. Now let go of the mode button and turn the input dial to select any shutter speed (successive detents will set shutter speeds in half stops from 30-1/2000 sec.). The camera will automatically set and display the proper-exposure aperture (also in half stops) as soon as you partially depress the shutter release. The display will remain on in the finder and-on the LCD panel for about 8 sec. and change with changing lighting conditions, but the reading locks in the instant proper focus is attained in the One Shot AF mode. If the exposure display in the finder remains continuously lit, you'll get the proper exposure. A blinking maximum aperture indicates underexposure (select a slower shutter speed), while a blinking minimum aperture indicates overexposure (select a faster shutter speed). The shutter speed digits don’t blink and the camera shake beeper doesn't sound when you're working in Tv mode.

Switch to Av (aperture priority) mode and the camera will automatically be set to f/5.6. Now turn the input dial and you can select any aperture (in half stops) possible with the lens in use. The camera will now set and display the proper-exposure shutter speed when you partially depress the shutter release in the same manner that camera-selected apertures are shown in the Tv mode. As you’d expect, underexposure is now indi-. cated by a blinking 30" speed in the finder and overexposure is shown by a blinking 2000. When the shutter speed falls below about one over the focal length in use, the slow shutter warning beeper sounds if it's turned on.

Unlike most other multi-mode SLRs, the EOS 650 does not provide any in-finder indication of the autoexposure mode you're in. If you've just set one of the three AE modes, you obviously know what it is, and if you want to refresh your memory, just glance at the LCD panel. However, switching AE
modes with the camera at eye level is one convenience most EOS owners won't avail themselves of unless they have very good-memories. At eye level it’s pretty hard to tell whether you're in Tv or Av mode by just turning the input dial and observing the readouts—both apertures and shutter speeds change in either case.

You'll love the metered manual mode, so long as you don't mind selecting your shutter speed first and metering the proper-exposure aperture second. To select M mode, press the Mode button while you turn the input dial until M appears in the upper left-hand corner of the LCD panel, and, praise be, in the finder LCD panel as well, to the left of the digital readouts. The camera will now be automatically set to 1/125 sec. at f/5.6. Now turn the input dial to the left or right to select slower or faster shutter speeds respectively (in half stops), bring the camera to eye level, and press the M-labeled (manual metering) button located on the left-hand side of the camera about an inch below the lens release button. At this point the shutter speed digits disappear and are replaced by a CL, an OP or an OO. The 00 symbol indicates that the aperture displayed will provide the correct exposure at the shutter speed you've selected, CL means you must close down the aperture (by keeping the M button depressed and turning the input dial clockwise) to obtain the correct metered exposure. OP means that you've got to open open it up (by turning the same dial in the opposite direction) until the 00 appears. Using this system you can manually meter the exposure to an accuracy of 21/г stop (the AE modes will get you to within 1/4 stop or less in most cases according to our lab tests). However, if the light or your shooting angle changes you must check your exposure by pressing the M button just before you take the shot, then letting go of the M button before you press the shutter release. The shutter won't fire when the M button is depressed. Set M exposure mode along with the C (continuous) film-wind mode and the finder readouts will still go out after the first exposure, but the exposure will remain locked in at your initial manual setting.

Up to this point there have been few surprises, but now we get into the only other mode that’s clearly indicated in the finder— the EOS 650's unique depth mode. Canon calls it an exposure mode, but as you'll soon see it's a lot more than that. To select Depth mode press the Mode button and turn the input dial until the word DEPTH appears at the upper right-hand corner of the LCD panel. Now compose your subject in the finder and determine which near and far points you wish to be in sharp focus. Center the AF frame over the foreground (closest subject area) and press the shutter release partway to focus. The camera will now focus, the focus OK LED will light, the beeper will beep if turned on, and dEP 1 will be displayed both in the finder and top LCD panel. Now follow the same procedure but center the AF frame over the background (most distant) area you wish to record sharply and dEP 2 will appear in the displays. Partially depress the shutter a third time and something quite remarkable happens. The camera automatically focuses to the optimum in-between distance to maximize depth of field, sets the aperture that will render objects at the near and far distances sharply, and sets the corresponding proper-exposure shutter speed. Now all you have to
do is press the shutter release all the way in to take the shot. Of course even the EOS cannot perform miracles; if your two focus points are widely separated, especially in fairly dim light and/or with slow film, you may get the right aperture and shooting distance to cover your intended depth of field, but at too slow a shutter speed to hand-hold. Underexposure and overexposure in the Depth mode are indicated as in the P mode, by both sets of digits flashing. If it isn’t possible to get the distance range in focus at the smallest aperture, that value will start to blink. However if you elect to shoot anyway, you will get the best results possible under the shooting conditions. You can even use Depth mode to minimize depth of field by focusing on two identical or very close distances before you shoot.

Incidentally, Canon’s Depth mode presumes a circle of confusion of 0.03mm. Actual depth of field is subjective depending on the viewing conditions. With bigger enlargements, effective depth of field decreases and you might have to manually select smaller apertures than the Depth mode provides automatically. Regrettably, the Depth mode cannot be used in flash photography. If you set Depth mode, Canon dedicated flash units will automatically override it as soon as they recycle. Presumably the main reason Depth and Flash modes are incompatible is that objects much closer than the optimum focus point would be overexposed and those much farther away would be underexposed.

Now that we've got the 650’s many exposure and operating modes pretty well under control, let's examine its metering patterns. The EOS provides through-the-lens (TTL) metering at full aperture only, using an SPC cell located above the pentaprism housing (there’s another cell for off-the-film TTL flash metering in the base of the mirror box). The main meter cell is divided into six parts to provide a choice of fwo metering patterns. The standard metering pattern for all exposure modes is what Canon calls evaluative metering. This is a multi-pattern system that combines elements of the AMP system in the Nikon FA and the ESP system in the Olympus ОМ-PC. In Canon’s system the field is divided into six zones (diagram and test results, original reports). The six areas include a central circular zone, a band around the central zone, and four equalsized areas around the perimeter of the screen. The system measures luminance in each of these areas, analyzes their levels and distribution to determine such variables as subject size and brightness, normal or backlit scene, and then sets the exposure using specially developed algorithms based on analyzing thousands of actual photos and corresponding exposures.

In the vast majority of cases Canon’s evaluative metering system delivers the "correct" exposure, or at least one that most people will find pleasing. It compensates effectively in many tough metering situations, including the classic backlit portrait, but it isn't perfect. Based on our extensive field tests, we’d place its overall accuracy at about 96%. This compares favorably with competitive multi-pattern systems but is not markedly superior to the best of them.

For most pictures, evaluative or multi-pattern exposure systems work very well, and they can eliminate a lot of drudgery, letting you concentrate on the action or on the composition. But when you need maximum creative control of dramatic lighting or wish to record unconventional effects, you’ve got to know precisely what your metering system is doing. That’s why most multi-pattern-metering SLRs incorporate a second, user-selectable metering pattern that lets you take full control of final results.

Canon calls the alternative metering option in the 650 "partial metering" and advises you to use it when there is a large difference in brightness between the main subject and the background; when shooting a stage performance, for example. Basically, partial metering is a variety of spot or limited area metering, with virtually all of the meter’s sensitivity concentrated in the central 6.5% (or 8mm) of the picture area, which is clearly defined by a very thin black circle circumscribing the AF frame in the finder (see finder diagram, original report). Partial metering can be used in all exposure modes except full auto (green rectangle) position— a sensible limitation intended to keep novices out of trouble.

To use partial metering, place the subject or subject area you wish to meter within the partial metering circle in the finder and, while pressing the shutter button partway in, press the partial metering button (it's at the topmost portion of the thumb rest on the back) with your right thumb. This feels quite comfortable and natural, but requires a deliberate action. A red asterisk now appears in the finder display indicating that the partial metering mode and AE lock are on. You can now remove your finger from the partial metering button; the original metered exposure value remains locked in as long as you keep the shutter button partially depressed (except in Depth and Flash modes) and you're free to recompose the picture while holding the reading. Just press the shutter release completely to take the shot. You can even shoot sequentially while retaining your original reading, so long as yoj keep the shutter release partially depressed after each exposure—a useful technique when shooting sequences in unvarying lighting conditions.

We found partial metering to be very convenient and effective in dealing with tricky lighting conditions, or when we wanted to experiment creatively with exposure. For instance, creating high key effects or silhouettes was almost as easy as shooting on auto pilot, and by zooming to tele to meter and back to wide or normal to take the shot we could get, in effect, true spot metering. As with any spot metering system, it takes a knowledgeable photographer to get the most out of it, but we were delighted to find this sophisticated option built into a "broad spectrum" autofocus SLR.

Another useful feature for serious photographers is the 650's wide-ranging exposure compensation system. Hold in the EXP. COMP button (it's about 1/2 in. behind the mode button) and all indications on the LCD panel disappear and are replaced by 0.0 and a ± symbol. Now, while holding in the button, turn the input dial clockwise and you can dial in additional exposure in half-stop increments (all denoted with a +) up to 5 full stops; turn the dial in the opposite direction and you can select up to 5 stops less than the normal exposure (denoted by a -) in the same way. When you let go of the compensation button the original LCD display returns, but if you've dialed in any
corfipensation at all in either direction a ± symbol appears as a warning on the LCD panel and in the viewfinder, to the right of the aperture readout. To find out how much compensation you’ve set, just press the button and glance at the LCD. We think this system is well nigh perfect, and persnickety types who insist on setting exposure compensation in 1/З-stop intervals can always resort to the ISO settings.

Yet another device we were pleased to find on this electronified marvel is a depth-of-field preview button, which is really nothing more than a switch for the electromagnetic diaphragm motor in the lens barrel. The button itself is found on the left, front side of the body, in between the lens release button and the manual metering button. Push it in while holding the shutter button partway in and you’ll hear a quiet "tick" as the lens stops down to working aperture. If the camera-or user-selected aperture is about f/5.6 or smaller, the finder will darken noticeably and you will have a better idea (but not a perfect one) of whether objects before or beyond the point of optimum focus will be sharply rendered.

After all this tech talk, perhaps you're wondering what shooting with such a "complicated” camera is really like. Happily, the genius who came up with Canon's slogan, “So advanced it's simple," could have been talking about the EOS 650.

Film-loading procedure is what we've come to expect from motorized SLRs. Push the release button while you slide the back-opening tab on the camera’s left side and the back pops open. Swing it to the right and you'll see that the film compartment on the left incorporates six spring-loaded, gold-plated DX contacts. (Note in passing that the back is easily removable and that there’s a vertical array of eight flat, gold-plated contacts to the right of the take-up spool that mate with Canon's simple Quartz Data Back E or super-sophisticated Technical Back E that has its own optional keyboard unit.) Now hook the flat end of the film cartridge under the rewind shaft, push the bottom end forward until it seats, pull the film leader across a metal plate over the sprocket shaft until its end coincides with the orange mark (make sure you can feel the sprocket teeth through the film perforations and that the film lies flat) and close the back. The instant you snap it shut, the motor whirs discreetly, and film-winding graphics move along the bottom of the LCD panel as the ISO setting is briefly displayed. If all is well, the film loading symbol stops moving, the ISO disappears, a “1” appears in the frame number box, and the LCD displays all mode settings. Non-DX cartridges are keyed in at the last used ISO setting, and you can display your set ISO at any time by pushing in the yellow and blue buttons in the little covered button in the back.

Now turn the main switch to the full auto (green rectangle) position, or select your exposure mode after turning to the A or Beep settings, confirm that the sliding tab atop the lens is set to AF, and you're ready to shoot. Bring the camera to eye level, center your subject in the AF frame and lightly press the comfortably angled shutter button and the EOS will focus with a quiet, high-pitched "zzzzt." The instant the camera attains correct focus the OK LED lights and the beeper emits two short beeps (if enabled). Just follow through with your finger on the com-
mendably smooth shutter release to take the shot.

There’s nothing remarkable about this basic procedure, which is common to virtually all AF SLRs; it’s how the EOS does it that's significant. To begin with, the camera is luxuriously comfortable to hold. Its rounded contours fit your hands with near perfection, especially the grip and thumb rest, which are superbly shaped, with just the right touch of softness imparted by their rubberized coverings.

The EOS is also beautifully balanced and rather light for its size. Evidently Canon's philosophy of "mass centralization," essentially concentrating most of the camera’s weight in the central, bottom portions of the body, is quite effective. The EOS handles extremely well with either of our test lenses, the light 50mm f/1.8 and the somewhat heavier 35-105mm f/3.5-4.5. Combine this degree of handling ease with the 650's very smooth shutter action and well-damped mirror and you have a camera that can effectively be hand-held at somewhat slower speeds than many other SLRs we've tried.

Good ergonomics extend to control placement as well. We've already extolled the logic of the controls’ functions and the placement and action of the shutter release, but the location of the manual metering, depth-of-field preview, and spot-metering buttons are also well thought out, and the electronic input dial falls neatly under your right index finger just where you'd expect to find it. Pressing the mode or compensation button with your left index finger as you turn the input dial with your right feels very natural. Only the main switch is a bit awkward for right-handers, but it’s usually used only at the beginning and end of a shooting session to select the basic mode of operation or to turn the camera on and off.

The way in which the EOS autofocuses is also commendable. It’s swift and smooth with very little tendency to "hunt,” even in low light or with fairly low-contrast subjects, so long as there is adequate detail. Whether or not it is actually faster than competitive AF systems under all conditions will have to await a true side-by-side comparison test, but we can affirm that the EOS definitely focuses as well as any other AF SLR we’ve tried, and better than some. It is also the equal of any other AF system in low-light performance, but does not appear to be markedly superior to its leading competitors.

To date, no AF system approaches perfection and the EOS has trouble when subjects having little or no contrast are centered in the AF frame, in extremely low light (unless a dedicated Canon Speedlight supplies a near-IR focusing pattern) and with subjects having horizontal patterns, such as window blinds. Highly reflective or extremely backlit subjects occasionally caused the EOS to "hunt," as, of course, did subjects that move so fast you can't even keep them centered in the AF frame. Despite these genuine deficiencies, you will not find any other current SLR that outperforms the Canon EOS 650 in overall autofocusing ability.

Actually, encountering a subject that must be focused manually lets you experience one of the 650’s nicest features—its manual focusing system. Unlike most other AF SLRs' lenses, the EOS' focusing rings don't turn as the camera autofocuses; only the inner barrels rotate. You must still keep your fingers clear of the front of the lens, which moves in and out as it turns, but you can't snag your fingers on a rotating focusing ring as you can with other AF SLRs. To minimize this possibility, other manufacturers have made the manual focusing rings on their AF lenses very thin, and placed them near the front of the lens. A few (notably Olympus) have eliminated them completely, relying on power focus controlled by a switch on the body.

Because the focusing rings on Canon EF lenses need to rotate only when you slide their switches from AF to M and physically turn them, they could be made much wider, more heavily knurled, and of a grippier material for easier manipulation. They also provide smoother manual focusing action than most other AF lenses, and can be focused very swiftly on the EOS' bright, very contrasty screen. Incidentally, while the 650's finder magnification is slightly lower than average at 0.8X, it provides greater eye relief than most SLRs (its eyepoint is 19.3mm) and virtually the entire frame can be seen by most eyeglass wearers.

No analysis of the EOS 650 would be complete without explaining its truly remarkable flash system. A glance at the camera's five-contact dedicated hot shoe suggests that something fascinating is afoot and it most certainly is. The EOS system provides two-way communication between flash and body, automatically sets the flash for the proper ISO with DX film, and for the lens and focal length in use. Both the Speedlite 300EZ and 420EZ introduced with the camera provide automatic internal zooming, and Advanced TTL (A-TTL) operation, which automatically sets the flash sync speed (upon recycling) and the correct aperture value based on overall scene illumination and subject illumination. These are ordinarily determined by a near-infrared preflash. The TTL system meters the light reflected from the film surface and permits automatic fill-in flash under a wide variety of ambient lighting conditions.

Since most of our flash pictures were shot using the more powerful and comprehensive 420EZ, we'll concentrate on this model. Basically it's a medium-sized shoe mount unit in smooth black polycarbonate with rubberized accents to match the EOS. Its forward-tilted body and sleekly conservative styling also complement the camera very nicely. At the top is a tilting, swiveling head with detents at the 60°, 75°, and 90° tilt and forward-facing positions, and marked click-stops at 60°, 75°, and 90° swivel positions to left and right (for side bounce). Push up the “bounce latch" at the back of the head and you'll find that it can be swiveled up to 90° clockwise, and a full 180° counterclockwise. No release is needed to tilt the head.

On the front of the 420EZ, below the head, is a large, round sensor surrounded by a nearly rectangular panel that serves as an infrared light emitter for flash exposure determination. Near the bottom, in front of the foot and locking collar, is a trapezoidal AF Auxiliary Light Emitter that puts out a nearinfrared pattern that allows the camera to autofocus in total darkness over a 3-26 ft. range. On the unit's left-hand side is a slide-to-open, hinged battery compartment for four common AA cells of any kind (preferably nicads or alkalines).

Undoubtedly the most interesting part of the 420EZ is its back, which features a large LCD panel, an array of five clearly labeled
buttons, and, at the bottom, an on-off switch on the right and a ready light on the left. Even before you mount the unit on the camera you can have lots of fun with it. Slide the white switch from О to I, uncovering a red dot, to turn the flash on. The LCD panel will now display A-TTL, A Zoom and 35mm, and the ready light will turn green in about a second and red several seconds later. Push the ready light in and you can fire a test flash.

What is the meaning of all this? It's quite simple actually. A-TTL means you're in the aforementioned A-TTL mode and the ca-mera/flash combo will set everything for you automatically, and provide automatic fill-in flash when needed, even if you decide to choose your own aperture or shutter speed. The A Zoom means that the flash head will automatically zoom internally to provide the appropriate coverage for the lens or focal length in use as soon as you mount the flash on the camera, turn it on and touch the shutter button. This focal length is read out on the right side of the flash's LCD. Push the Zoom button on the right and the display will change to M Zoom and indicate coverage for the widest possible focal length, 24mm. Keep pressing the M Zoom button and a built-in motor will move the flash head incrementally and the display will change to 28, 35, 50, 70, then 80mm, the longest focal length setting. Press it again and you’re back in A Zoom mode at the 35mm setting.

What about that two-colored ready light? it's another ingenious system that provides some of the rapid-fire advantages of lithium batteries in a flash powered by conventional AA cells. You’ll get a quick, low-voltage, rap-idfire flash in 0.2-1.5 sec. at 1 /2—1 /6 power (with fresh alkaline batteries) when the ready light turns green and a full-powered flash if you wait from about 3-11 sec. longer (depending on how much power was used for the last shot) at which point the ready light turns red.

Just to the left of the zoom button is one marked "light." Press it and the entire LCD is illuminated in the jazzy blue radiance of an electro-luminescent display. The light stays on for about 8 sec., long enough to let you see and set your flash modes in darkness. Another thing that automatically turns itself off is the flash itself. Leave it on accidentally and it shuts itself off in about 5 min. to save power (providing you haven't touched the camera's release or changed a flash setting in the interim). Thirty seconds before it does so, the LCD display flashes in warning.

In the middle of the five-button array is the Sync button. Press it in with the unit turned on and you'll get a tiny three-triangle display right under the focal length digits. This indicates that second curtain flash sync will be made automatically. Ordinarily an electronic flash fires the instant the first shutter curtain opens completely. By waiting to fire the flash until just before the second or closing shutter curtain starts running, the flash still clearly illuminates the subject, but it creates a trailing image of any luminous object that moves across the picture field while the shutter is open. For example, use a slow shutter speed with second curtain flash sync as your subject swings a flashlight, and the resulting trail of light will appear opposite to the direction of subject motion, which looks much more natural in the picture.

The next button to the left is labeled MANU, and when yOu press it, you're set for manual flash. The LCD display now reads
М1/1, which denotes manual at full power. Press the button again and it will read M1/2. Keep pressing it and you can select 1/4,1/8, 1/16 and 1/32 power before you get back to full power. The last button is marked A-TTL and it's for getting you back to Advanced TTL mode from any other mode.

If you think you've run out of options just because you’ve run out of buttons, guess again. The 420EZ's most dazzling trick is obtained by pressing the MANU and SYNC buttons simultaneously, as suggested by the Multi-and-brackets mark centered under both buttons. When you do so, the previously described manual display appears along with MULTI, 1 HZ. You are now in the Stroboscopic Flash mode.

Yes, this is one electronic flash that can truly be called a strobe. If you now press the Sync button repeatedly, the display will change from 1 HZ to 2HZ— all the way up to 5HZ, then back to 1 HZ. This is the number of flashes per sec. you will get. No, you can't get five flashes per sec. on full power (try 1/8 power), you can’t get an unlimited number of stroboscopic flashes during a long exposure even at 1/32 power (it's 244 max), and the strobe mode is strictly a manual exposure mode (consult the 420EZ's manual for details). However, you can get true stroboscopic multi-image .effects of “disassembled motion" a lot more easily than Dr. Edgerton did, providing you choose a highly reflective subject and a dark or distant background and use a tripod. It's not as easy as falling off a log and it's not a capability you’ll use every day, but it definitely works and it sure is nifty.

All right, let's slide the five-pin 420EZ into the EOS 650's five-contact dedicated hot shoe and see what else it can do. For starters, if your subject is too far away for the AF auxiliary focusing light, the focus OK LED in the finder blinks, warning you to move closer. In A-TTL flash and programmed AE modes, the flash chooses the proper-exposure aperture and flash sync shutter speed (up to 1/125 sec.), and both these values blink in the finder if the subject is too far away. With daylight fill-in flash the minimum aperture number will blink if the background will be overexposed but the main subject will still be correctly exposed.

When the camera is set to shutter-priority (Tv) mode, you can choose any shutter speed you wish from 30 sec. to 1/125 sec. (the camera will override faster speeds) and the flash will automatically set the correct autoflash aperture based on film speed, subject reflectivity, etc. The beyond-range warning works as it does in P mode, but the maximum aperture now blinks when the background will be underexposed, and the minimum aperture blinks if it’ll be overexposed. The minimum aperture may stop blinking if you select a faster shutter speed, and the main subject will be properly exposed in any case.

In aperture-priority (Av) mode, you can select any autoflash aperture you wish— useful for fill-in flash portraits and flash sync at slow shutter speeds (make sure to check your shutter speed readout as the camera shake beeper won't sound). As before, if both shutter and aperture digits blink in the finder, it's an underexposure warning and you must move closer. If the 30 sec. digits blink, A-TTL is impossible and the background will be underexposed (choose a larger aperture or move closer). When the flash sync shutter speed blinks, the background will be overexposed. In either case, the flash will revert to normal TTL and the main subject will be correctly exposed.

Naturally, you can also use the 420EZ in the camera’s manual metering mode. In this case the flash's LCD will read "TTL" and the exposure will not be balanced between the main subject and the background as it is in A-TTL mode—only the correct exposure for the main subject can be obtained. You can now select whatever aperture you wish and shutter speeds up to 1/125 sec. Press the shutter button lightly and your autoflash shooting distance range in feet appears at the bottom of the flash LCD panel. The automatic shooting distance range changes according to the flash head position, film speed and set aperture and goes up to 99 ft. (after which point a delta appears). If correct exposure is impossible, the maximum shooting distance blinks.

Now remember that the flash also has its own manual mode that lets you set fractional power. Set this mode and choose your flash intensity, set the camera to manual exposure mode and, yes, you can still determine the correct flash exposure even at fractional power settings. Here's how. Choose any shutter speed up to 1/125 sec., set the camera's AF mode to One Shot, focus on your subject, and read the distance off the lens' distance scale. Now press the camera's manual aperture M button while turning the input dial and note the aperture and distance readouts appearing on the flash's LCD. When the displayed distance nearly equals the subject distance you just read off the lens, you've got the correct exposure. Obviously this method isn't the last word in convenience, but it's pretty amazing nonetheless.

In actual use the 420EZ is every bit as simple to use as it is complicated to describe. We were particularly enamored of its bounce performance, which was extremely good in both A-TTL and TTL modes with no need for calculations. The instant you tilt or swivel the flash head, the focal length indications disappear from the LCD panel and a cute little diagram of a bouncing flash appears in the lower left-hand corner. In all autoexposure modes, you get A-TTL flash when possible, and when you bounce or tilt, the main flash head fires a low-intensity flash to monitor subject reflectivity. It is difficult to determine whether this alone accounts for the unit's excellent autoflash performance in bounce flash photography, but it probably helps.

Of course not even this incredibly versatile and cleverly designed shoe mount flash is perfect. We did get a small but significant percentage (about 3%) of imperfectly exposed flash pictures—primarily overexposed close-up portraits in the 2-4 ft. range— on narrow latitude transparency film. On one occasion we managed to shoot with the flash recycle signal (a lightning bolt to the left of the focus OK LED) lit in the finder but got no flash. Loosening the retaining collar and seating the flash properly cured the problem. Finally, mounting the flash along with the 35-105 zoom caused the EOS to fall forward on its neckstrap, which was annoying and uncomfortable. This tendency may be slightly aggravated by the forward tilt of the flash, but it’s certainly not a problem unique to this camera.

To say that we liked the Speedlight 420EZ is an understatement. We consider it one of the best and most comprehensive flash units of its size in current production. And we hope that its low-voltage, rapid-fire flash capability and sophisticated ranging system are emulated by other flash makers.

No matter which criteria you apply—engineering sophistication, overall performance and quality, potential for future development, desirable features, handling, ergonomics or just plain practical usability as a picture-making machine—the Canon EOS 650 is a brilliantly successful camera. It also happens to be as superbly integrated and functional an “electro-optical-system" as you're likely to find anywhere. For all its whizz-bang features, it’s a remarkably unintimidating machine, fully capable of yielding fine results in the hands of most amateur photographers. And for all its "broad spectrum" appeal, it incorporates almost every feature a serious photographer might want, with the notable, but minor, exception of multiple-exposure capability.

In criticizing a camera of this caliber, one is reduced to picking nits—bemoaning the lack of a 50mm f/1.4 or anything between 16 and 28mm in the initial EF lens range, or carping about the fully automatic rewind that doesn't leave a tongue peeking out of the film cartridge. Perhaps that's as it should be when a proud and competent company like Canon takes aim at a first-class competitor like the Minolta Maxxum and concentrates the bulk of its formidable resources on producing a better machine. Yes, the EOS 650 is unquestionably a great autofocus SLR that's fully capable of seducing even the conservative anti-AF SLR crowd. But is it significantly better than any other AF SLR around? Now you’ve really got us over a lens barrel. (July 1987)



