Nikon F100

Is the F100 an F5 Lite? Well, yes and no. The FI00 is crammed with most of the best features found on the F5, but won't feel like a workout with free weights when it comes time to use it. With its host of advanced features, some of which are improvements over those found on the F5, the FI00 is obviously an SLR intended for the professional or advanced amateur, yet it also manages to leave behind much of the bulk and weight of its more robust big brother. As such, it will make an ideal second or backup camera for the pro. For pros whose work does not demand the massive, rugged construction of the F5, the FI 00 may well be an ideal first choice.

Let’s start with the features shared by both cameras, but that have been improved for the F100. The F100 has the same 5-sensor dynamic autofocus
system that will switch manually or automatically between the two vertical linear sensors or the three horizontal cross sensors. Unlike the F5, however, the active sensor is illuminated in the viewfinder (taking another page out of the EOS playbook, it would seem), and its brightness is determined by ambient light levels. Speaking of the viewfinder, its display has been improved for easier legibility. The typical Nikon black or green on gray numeral display has been replaced with a bright green display on a black background. The F100 has the same EOS-thumbwheel-looking AF-area selector as is found on the F5, but with a couple of refinements: the addition of a primary AF sensor identifier switch and a primary sensor lock. And, if you want to call weight and size reduction an improvement, the difference is dramatic: with batteries, the F100 weighs 31.2 ounces (874 grams), compared to the F5's 50.4 ounces (1411 grams).

Now, let’s look at the most important features shared by both the FI00 and F5 that have not yet been mentioned. The FI00 has the F5's focusing sensors - the largest focus sensor area of any SLR, Nikon claims. The F5’s focus tracking feature, in which focus of an object will be maintained, even if an object briefly blocks one's view, is there. So is the F5’s 3-D Matrix Metering, five 4mm spot metering sensors, and 75/25 centerweighted metering. And so is the five-segment balanced TTL fil flash, exposure bracketing options, adjustable program, shutter-priority, aperture-priority, and manual modes. The shutter speeds from 30 seconds to 1/8000 with flash sync at 1/250 are the same as well. Other shared features include second-curtain and slow speed flash sync, depth-of-field preview, multiple exposure capability, thorough gasketing against moisture and dust intrusion, and ±5 EV exposure compensation.
Finally, in areas where the cameras differ, the most obvious one is the metering pattern. The FI00 does not have the F5’s 1,005-segment color-sensitive metering system, but has instead a 10-segment 3-D Matrix metering system, similar to that found on the N90s, but a bit more advanced. The FI00 has also been designed for speed and ease of use. The F5 has a number of switches and locks that must be moved to release controls to better insure that they are not accidentally reset. By contrast, the FI00 has most of these inhibitors removed, the result being that it can be a very fast camera to set up, operate, and change settings on. In the finder department, the F5 has a removable one, will accept several accessory finders, and has an excellent selection of focusing screens (12 at this time). The FlOO’s finder is fixed, and currently there are only two available focusing screens, although this number will most likely be expanded. The F5 also has an eyepiece shutter, while the FI00 does not, and the F5 has a good old-fashioned manual rewind crank. A surprising exclusion (at least to me) is the omission of a mirror lock-up feature for the FI00, which the F5 has. The FI00 has the capability to upload and download data to a personal computer directly, whereas the F5 requires the addition of a multifunction control back to do the same. Lastly, the FI00 has 22 built in custom function settings, which allow the user to modify much of the F 100's default settings.
