The first step into automation for a company such as Nikon had to be decisive and one that would firmly establish auto exposure control cameras. This camera achieved that and also pointed the way to a smaller, lighter brand of Nikon. Admittedly it is not as small or as light as many of its competitors but it has certainly shed ounces from the frame of Nikons of an earlier generation.

Metering for the aperture priority automation system and the manual facility is by means of centre-weighted reading Silicon Photo Diodes on either side of the eyepiece. The aperture selected on the lens barrel is shown at the top of the viewfinder screen. When set in the auto operating mode a swinging needle indicates the shutter speed which will be given. There are also positions for under and over exposure. When set to manual a second, green needle shows the shutter speed which has been set. It is then a simple matter of lining the two up.

The screen supplied with the camera has a centre spot split image rangefinder with a microprism collar on a matt field. There are two other screens available for those whose requirements vary.

On both the auto and manual settings the shutter speed range is from 1 /1000 to 8secs. These are set on a dial conventionally placed to the right of the pentaprism. There are three additional positions: M90, which is a mechanical speed of 1 /90sec for electronic flash synchronisation or use in the event of battery failure when other speeds could not be used; B, for exposures longer than eight seconds and Auto, which sets the camera in that mode. The meter is switched on in true Nikon style by moving the wind-on lever to a stand-off position away from the camera body.

The wind-on action has the smooth Nikon feel that we have come to expect from this robust range of cameras. Beside this lever is the conveniently placed multiple exposure control lever. In front of the wind-on lever is the additive frame counter and next to that is the shutter release button which is threaded to accept a cable release.

On top of the pentaprism is the hot-shoe for positioning flash guns. This has one additional contact for
the relay of information to and from dedicated units. There is also a conventional P/C synch terminal on the top left of the body for firing other units by means of a standard cable.

The re-wind knob with its folding crank lever is at the left hand end of the top plate. This is surrounded by the film speed selector dial marked in ASA from 12 to 4000 in third stop increments. On the other side of this dial is the exposure compensation control for use with the auto mode. This gives the capacity of up to + and -two stops.

Perhaps even more useful than the override is the exposure memory lock on the front of the body. The lever is pressed towards the lens and the reading taken is then ‘locked’ in while the lever is depressed until exposure is made. This also acts as the delayed action self timer when turned the other way and allows a variable delay of between one and 10 seconds depending on how far it is turned.

Above this lever, on the right side of the lens mounting, is the stop-down button. This allows depth of field preview or stop-down metering when using older Nikon lenses which are not auto indexing (Al).

To overcome internal vibrations that may contribute to camera shake the mirror action is pneumatically dampened. Together with the shutter curtains which move vertically, this makes for a camera that seems to be quieter in operation than many of its competitors. This camera will take the Nikon MD-11 motor drive giving continuous shooting up to 3.5 frames per second or single frame advancing. It will also take the very wide range of Nikon lenses and accessories such as rings, bellows and electronic flash units.

Since the 1970s Nikon have taken only one more step in the direction of compactness with the auto only EM. The F3 has largely followed the FE and must owe much of its design to lessons learned with this camera.

With its swing needle exposure metering and slightly large body the FE could be regarded by many as a little old fashioned. But in facilities and specification it cannot be bettered and has that advantage that cannot be quantified - the Nikon quality of handling and toughness.
