For a full decade the Nikon F2 ruled the professional scene. A mechanical camera with a metering system contained within the pentaprism or Photomic Head it could be relied on under practically any circumstances to produce excellent results.

Its replacement, the F3, relies on battery power, has aperture priority automation and the meter system in the body.

It offers interchangeable heads, screens and viewfinder information by means of Liquid Crystal Diodes (LCDs). It also takes the full range of Nikon lenses, motors, winders and accessories.

The top plate offers no great surprises but a few refreshing differences. The re-wind knob is at the left hand end and has a folding lever. At the rear is the film speed setting dial which is viewed through a small window. This is in ASA only and runs from 12 to 6400.

On each side is a metal strip which act as contacts for fitting a Nikon flash gun. To the front are three additional contacts for the flow of information with dedicated units. The positioning of the contacts here means that the flash is well away from the optical axis -perhaps the worst place for it to be located, but one that most of the other manufacturers have opted for with hot-shoes on top of the pentaprism housing. It does mean, however, that changing rolls with a flash fitted can be awkward. On the right of the re-wind knob is the exposure compensation control for use on the automatic setting. This allows + or - two stops override to be introduced.

To the right of the prism is the shutter speed selection and mode control. This allows shutter speeds between 1/2000 and 8sec to be selected. When turned to auto (A) the same range is available but steplessly, depending on the light conditions and aperture chosen.

The X synch speed of 1 /80sec for electronic flash is mechanical as is the brief time (B) setting so some sort of exposure could be made with no battery power.

As well as B for longer exposure there is a T (time) setting. With this set the shutter release is pressed and the shutter stays open until another shutter speed is set.

In front of the shutter speed dial is the self timer activating switch, this is for a set 10 seconds and is indicated by a flashing LED on the front panel.

The shutter release, which is threaded to take a
cable release forms the hub of the wind-on lever. The release here is electronic so Nikon have thoughtfully provided a second one on the front of the body which delivers a mechanical 1/60sec in an emergency. Beside this is the frame counter and around it the shutter lock and multiple exposure lever.

On the front right of the body and beside the self timer warning LED is a button with a switch around it. When the button is pressed the lens stops down to its working aperture for the preview of depth of field or for metering with the older style of Nikon lenses. The switch around this locks the mirror up, is ideal for shake free shots and must be used with the maximum speed of six frames per second of the MD-4 motor drive.

Directly below this and at the bottom of the lens mount is another dual purpose control. This is the exposure memory lock for awkward lighting when the camera is being used in the auto mode. This is also the mechanical shutter release discussed earlier.

On top of the body on the left side is the P/C synch terminal covered by a plastic cap.

The metering system is rather exceptional and a step away from anything that Nikon have produced before. For normal exposures, some of the light falling on the mirror passes through it by means of a pattern of tiny holes. This is reflected from a second mirror onto the back of the SPD cell in the base of the camera. Eighty per cent of the reading is taken from the centre spot of the viewing screen, the rest of the screen giving the remaining 20 per cent.

The standard screen comprises a split image rangefinder surrounded by a microprism collar on a matt field, in addition there are a full 20 alternatives for specialist work or for those requiring another system of focusing.

The viewfinder information is by LCDs-the first time this had been used in a camera. They cannot be seen in dim light but Nikon have provided a light for them.

The information provided is aperture, shutter speed, under and over exposure and whether the camera is set in the manual mode.

The Nikon F3 should never be regarded as a camera for which you simply buy a standard lens. It is the working tool of the professional that will operate in any circumstances. If I were a professional I would look very little further than the Nikon F3.
