The Nikon F4

The F4 was marketed in two versions when new: the F4 and the F4s, the difference being the battery pack included with the camera. The F4s is the
standard U.S. model. It has the larger battery pack/grip (the MB-21) that accommodates six AAs and powers the motor drive to a conservatively-rated 5.7 fps. The smaller MB-20 battery pack, which takes four AAs, is the standard battery pack in Japan and Europe, and is available as an option in the States. The F4 with the MB-20 is good for a top speed of “only” 4 fps, but the package is considerably lighter and more compact. A lot of folks opt for the MB-20 option to reduce weight. Another optional battery pack, the MB-23, was also a popular option. Still available, it allows the use of NiCads and offers increased performance over the MB-21, or so Nikon has claimed, but the motor’s maximum continuous rate is still the same as when using the MB-21. The MB-23 also adds another 5 ounces of weight to an already heavy system.

The F4’s autofocus modes are one-shot (focus priority) and continuous (servo), with predictive autofocus. “Freeze focus” (trap focus) is available with the MF-21 Multi-Control Back. The camera has an AF lock button. Exposure modes include program, high-speed program, shutter and aperture priority AE, and metered manual. Metering options include Nikon’s acclaimed five-zone matrix metering system, 60/40 centerweighted averaging and a 5mm central spot selection. The matrix metering option switches automatically between two sensitivity pat-
terns depending on whether the camera is held horizontally or vertically and will choose between four different metering programs: centerweighted, highlight-bias, shadow-bias, or a five-segment averaging method.

Shutter speeds range from 30 seconds to 1/8000 (4 seconds to 1/8000 in manual mode), plus B and T, with X sync at 1/250. The integral motor has three continuous advance modes: hi-speed (5.7 fps), low speed (3.4 fps) and “silent” (1 fps), although “stealth” seems a more appropriate label for the latter. The motor makes this strange, subdued chugging sound as it sneaks the film to the next frame. Single frame advance is also available.

Flash photography with the SB-24 or later Speedlights provides the user with a variety of TTL exposure options, including auto fill flash widi variable fill ratios, multistrobe effects, second-cur-tain sync and variable power levels. And, yes, Nikon did think to include a PC socket.

Other features include interchangeable viewfinders and screens, interchangeable backs, DX film setting with override, multiple exposure capability, AE lock, exposure compensation, built-in diopter correction, an eyepiece shutter, mirror lock-up, a manual rewind option, depth of field preview, a rubberized body, moisture resistant seals and a whole lot more.

The F4 accepts all F-mount Nikkor lenses. Focus confirmation is provided for with non-AT lenses. Matrix metering is possible with AI or AIs (non-AF) lenses, but when using non-AI lenses center-weighted metering is the only mode available.
