Nikon F5

The first time I saw a Nikon F5, I did a double take. Yes, the pentaprism displayed “Nikon” in big, prominent letters, and, yes, the camera bore the tell-
tale red stylepoint that has become a de facto Nikon trademark, but all that was predictable. What struck me was the uncanny resemblance it bore to a Canon EOS. This prompted my half-joking remark to the owner that it looked more like an EOS-2 than a Nikon. His expression immediately froze in mid-smile -apparently he didn’t appreciate my humor. That’s OK, though. . . I was only half-joking to begin with. The fact remains that the F5, with its Command Control Dials and its four-position rocker switch located where the EOS’s thumbwheel is, and its external LCD display instead of the F4’s control knob, and, well, just its general appearance - it does bear a strong resemblance to an EOS. To my way of thinking, the degree to which Nikon went to adopt much of the Hook and feel” of its arch-rival’s top-of-the-line camera illustrates just how serious the erosion among the ranks of Nikon loyalists had become.

As you probably know, for the better part of the past four decades Nikon has enjoyed an almost total monopoly among press and sports photographers and photojournalists. About a year after Nikon released the F4, Canon introduced the EOS-1, whose superior autofocus speed put Nikon on notice. Then in 1994, Canon released the EOS-In, a completely redesigned camera. Canon’s commitment to the professional segment of the market was further emphasized when it began releasing one eye-popping
optic after another, broadening its lens line until it had an appeal all its own. This, combined with the significant fact that Nikon’s long optics’ performance with the F4 was considerably below everybody’s expectations during that time frame, was enough of a reason for many sports and action photographers to dump their F4s and switch to Canon.

But as the desertions increased, to its credit, Nikon kept its collective head. Slowly and methodically, Nikon laid the groundwork for the F5. First the “D” lenses were released, with their distance information contacts, then the AFT lenses, with their internal focusing motors, and more recently, the AF-S lenses with their “silent wave” internal motors. Nikon’s strategy was apparently to have the lens lines largely in place prior to the release of the F5, which was just the reverse of the approach employed by Canon. (Bear in mind that the distance information transmitted by the “D” lenses is not supported on the F4 and that while the AF-I lenses will operate on the F4, the combination is slow). The above strategy appears to have been a sound one because it enables the F5-using pro to hit the ground running with not only what is arguably the most advanced camera in the world, but with high-performance lenses tailored for it. Time will tell if this strategy will be sufficient to coax the errants back to the Nikon fold. If and when they return, I suspect that, after using the F5 for a while, they will decide that this is a camera that has been well worth the wait.

No one is likely to question the fact that there are indeed breakthrough features found on the F5, like its 1,005-sensor color-sensitive metering array, or its 8 frame-per-second motor drive (the fastest of any camera with a movable mirror), or the fact that it can track fast-moving subjects and maintain this high rate of fire. Most significant to this writer, however, is the fact that photo
automation technology has reached such a level of maturity with the F5 that it should remain a top contender in 35mm photography for years to come despite the rate at which photo technology is being improved. We must not forget that emulsion-based photography is primarily concerned with recording images and events that take place in the physical world and not the virtual one. And it is due to the constraints that the physical world places upon objects which reside within it that we can expect the F5, with its current suite of features, to be a useful and competitive camera for the foreseeable future. To illustrate what I mean, let’s take a look at its autofocusing speed. The F5’s high-speed AF system is able to track, autofocus on, and photograph at the rate of 8 frames per second a subject moving in any direction relative to the photographer at speeds up to 200 miles per hour (320 km per hour). Granted, this is a truly amazing feat of engineering, but what makes it so significant is that even from the standpoint of a photographer who specializes in highspeed action events such as motorsports, the occasion on which one will need an AF system that exceeds these capabilities will be quite rare. Even at special events, such as the U.S. Navy Blue Angels or U.S. Air Force Thunderbirds exhibitions, where the photographer might be able to challenge the F5’s speed, the old technique of panning, which works perfectly well with manual focus cameras, should work equally well with the F5. What this means is this: because the F5 is able to handle just about any focusing and photographic task that will arise in the physical world, now or in the future, its AF capabilities will not likely be obso-lesced until the physical world is the one doing the obsolescing. Thus, improvements that will eventually surpass the F5’s capabilities are perhaps better viewed as refinements, and, in many if not most cases, simply academic.
We can make the same argument regarding the F5’s 1,005-segment metering system. I’ll admit that, when I first read of this, I thought it was a gimmick. I’ve always been partial to selective-area metering, you see, so I tend to be somewhat skeptical of all this multisegment stuff. I mean, 1,005 segments seemed to be more than just a bit excessive, and besides, would this system really make a demonstrable difference? The answer to that question appears to be a clear “yes.” The F5’s metering system is so intelligent that even the most difficult lighting situation is interpreted properly. Of course, we’ve all read this sort of hyperbole in advertizing before, ever since the origin of multi-segment metering patterns, in fact. Many of the cameras that already sport multi-segmented metering perform very well, but they can still be fooled into delivering incorrect exposure (or incorrect meter readings in manual mode) in certain unusually lit situations. But in the F5’s case, the hype seems to hold up under real-world con-, ditions because the metering area can be segmented to a sufficiently fine degree that most all unusual lighting situations can be accounted for. Thus, once again, until real-world conditions change, which isn’t likely to happen any time soon, the metering technology found on the F5 should serve its users well into the future.

The F5’s autofocusing modes are Single Servo AF (one-shot) with focus priority and Continuous Servo AF with release priority. The latter is capable of delivering up to 8 frames per second with full-AF operation with Lock-on. This is about 60% faster than any other AF system currently available. Lock-on is an interesting feature that ignores momentary interruptions caused by subjects that may interfere with your composition (for example, if somebody walks in front of a subject you’re tracking, momentarily blocking your view, the
camera should ignore this, and not attempt to refocus on the offending party). The F5 employs a wide-area cross-type sensor design with 5 selectable sensors. It is sensitive to both horizontal and vertical subjects, and has the capability to hand off the focusing chores from one sensor to another as the subject moves across the field of view.

The 3D Color Matrix Meter was first introduced on the F5. The matrix component, which employs the 1,005 individual measuring cells, is actually built into the F5’s DP30 finder, as is the RGB sensor that is used to evaluate a scene’s colors. It can even detect if the light source is natural light, tungsten, or fluorescent. When used in conjunction with Nikon lenses that have Distance Signal Technology, additional exposure accuracy can be mustered up, plus if the photographer is using either the SB-26 or SB-27, a pre-flash monitor will add even more exposure accuracy to the equation.

The meter employs more traditional metering methods as well, including a new type of center-weighted metering called Flexible	Center-Weighted

Metering. When selected, it defaults to the traditional method, in which 75% of the metering sensitivity occurs within a central 12mm circle and 25% of the sensitivity occurs exterior to it. But, using a feature unique to the F5, the user can also vary the size of the circle from 12mm to 8mm, 15mm, or 20mm. Spot metering is also available, with five separate meters to choose from. Not unexpectedly, the five spot sensors are located in the same areas of the viewfinder as the five autofocus sensors are.

Exposure modes consist of the standard selection of shiftable program AE, shutter- and aperture-priority AE, as well as metered manual. Other exposure features include a generous ±5 EV range of exposure compensation in 1/3-step increments, multiple exposure, and auto
exposure bracketing in 1/3,1/2, or full-stop increments. When using D-type lenses and a dedicated flash that supports all the features found on the F5, such as the SB-26 or SB-27, Nikon’s 3D Multi-Sensor Balanced Fill-Flash is available, which provides a host of options to tame the most challenging of lighting situations. Shutter speeds range from 30 seconds to 1/8000 second, plus B, with flash sync at 1/250 second. This can be increased to 1/300 second via Custom Setting #20 under certain circumstances (more on the Custom Settings shortly). When using the SB-26 set to FP High-Speed Sync mode, flash sync pictures at speeds up to 1/4000 are possible. Other flash options are slow and rear-curtain sync, off-camera TTL flash with the SC-18, SC-19, or SC-24, plus it has a dedicated TTL hot shoe, as well as a non-TTL PC terminal.

Other features are legion. 24 Custom Settings are available. If you have a Macintosh System 7.1 or Windows 95-based personal computer (or later), or if you have access to one, you may want to take a look at Nikon’s optional Photo Secretary software. With the F5 connected via the proper cable (AC-1WE for Windows platforms and AC-1ME for the Mac), a whole new world opens up. All the camera’s current settings can be displayed, the number of custom settings becomes expanded to 42, color and brightness distribution of a scene can be displayed, exposure data of each frame can be downloaded, and a whole lot of other neat stuff.

The F5 retains time-proven and revered F-system traditions such as 100% viewing area visibility, interchangeable viewfinders and focusing screens, a depth-of-field preview lever, and mirror pre-lock. Other niceties that have been retained are an eyepiece shutter, both auto and manual rewind, and, in addition to the full-information exterior LCD panel, it has a full-information viewfinder as well. The built-in highspeed motor drive provides single-shot, 3 tps continuous low-speed, 8 ips continuous high-speed, and 1 Ips continuous silent modes. You even get a choice of power sources for the motor drive: the nickel-metal-hydride (Ni-MH) MN-30 battery unit (good for 8 fps) or an alkaline battery unit (good for 7.5 Ips). One accessory that bears mentioning, and should be strongly considered, is the MF-28 Multi-Control Back. The MF-28 can imprint a copyright symbol, date and photographer’s name (up to 22 characters) between frames (e.g., ©2000 M. W. McBroom), which not only supplements copyright protection, it provides additional safeguards against film being lost or misplaced after processing. The MF-28 also allows a greater bracketing range, an intervalometer, freeze-focus (a very nice feature, sometimes called “trap focus” where the camera fires when a moving subject reaches a prefocused point in the frame), long time exposures up to 999 hours, and more.