The F Photomic Tn, introduced in 1967, looks like the F Photomic T, but performs centerweighted metering and has an “N” on the top of the finder just below the meter on-off button.
Lastly, the F Photomic FTn, introduced in 1968, provides semi- automatic maximum aperture indexing, done by rocking the aperture ring back and forth. It can be identified easily by the short aperture index slot located on the front face of the viewfinder with the numbers 5.6 - 2.8 -1.2 above it. This is also the only F finder that displays shutter speeds in the viewfinder. Of all the metered finders for the F, the FTn finder is, by far, the most popular and the most useful. With earlier finders, the photographer had to readjust the ASA dial each time he or she changed lenses of a different maximum aperture so they would index correcdy with the meter.
The metered F finders have proven themselves to be generally accurate and reliable, but they do wear out after lots of use. When trying out an F’s meter, rotate the aperture ring or shutter speed dial while keeping the viewfinder centered on a well-lighted subject. Observe the needle. It should track smoothly from one end of its range to the other. If it quivers or jumps, chances are the variable resistor inside the finder is either dirty or scratched. If it’s scratched the problem will deteriorate. If it’s dirty and not cleaned promptly, the dirt could scratch the resistor and . . .well, you get my drift. This procedure for checking
the meter applies not only to the F, but to the various F2 metered finders and to mechanical Nikkormats, as well. Nowadays, there are lots of dead F Photomic meters out there and parts for them are from scarce to impossible to come by. So test before you buy and buy with caution.

A couple of other aspects of Nikon Fs bear mentioning. The first has to do, once again, with finders. If you have a pre-Red Dot F and wish to mount a metered finder on the camera, a slight modification will be required if it hasn’t already been done. It involves a little bit of grinding that any qualified repair technician can do in a few minutes for a nominal charge. The second has to do with adapting a motor drive, such as the F-36, to the camera. Two small holes must be drilled into the inside baseplate of the camera. Only a small number of Fs came from Nikon predrilled, so if your camera has never had a motor drive attached, chances are the necessary holes aren’t there. Most any qualified repair technician can do this in minutes for a nominal charge.

In addition to the metering options discussed above, the Nikon F’s basic features include: shutter speeds ranging from 1 second to 1/1000, plus B and T, with X sync at 1/60; depth-of-field preview; mirror lock-up; a self-timer; interchangeable focusing screens, viewfinders and backs; and a motor drive option.

