Nikon also built a few F2Ts. The T stands for titanium. The F2T came with a standard eye level prism, which was made from titanium as were the top plates and base plate. Except for some very small production runs of purpose built cameras for NASA and an equally few F2 High Speed motor drive cameras, the F2T was produced primarily in two models, the more common of the two apparently intended for use by the Japanese press corps. It seems some excess F2Ts were shipped to the U.S. and Canada. The other model, known as the F2 Titan, is apparently the more rare of the two, although this is the matter of some debate. I’ve only seen one of these beauties. It had a textured matte black finish and the word Titan was engraved in script on the front left (facing the
camera). One rumor has it that the Titan was a special model built in small numbers for NASA, but this is likely not the case, since the very few F2s that were built for NASA were in fact highly modified from those that were sold to the general public.

The F2T is built like a tank and is the ultimate photographic workhorse. Even the pedestrian variety is somewhat rare and expensive. I haven’t listed prices for the F2 Titan because of its rarity, and because prices for rare pieces like the Titan are usually determined entirely by one party’s eagerness to buy and the other party’s eagerness (or lack thereof) to sell.

In addition to the various finders discussed above, other features of the Nikon F2 include: shutter speeds ranging from 1 second to 1/2000, plus B, with X sync at about 1/90 (it’s an intermediate setting between 1/60 and 1/125); interchangeable finders, focusing screens (interchangeable with those used in the F) and backs; . depth-of-field preview; mirror lock-up; a variable self-timer that’s good for more than just delaying the shutter; and an optional choice of three different motor drives.

Flere’s something I’ll bet many of you who have F2s and have used them for years may not know, especially if your camera does not have a finder with low light metering capability (DP-2, DP-3 or DP-12). The Nikon F2 is possibly the only mechanical 35mm SLR with slow shutter speeds that will go all the way down to 10 seconds. “Wait a minute!” you say. “The shutter speed dial’s slowest setting is 1 second!” You’d think so, wouldn't you? But with the Nikon F2, the slowest shutter speed on your dial is accessed from the B setting. And, no, I’m not talking about tripping the shutter with a cable release and counting “one thousand one, one thousand two...”
Lets say, for the sake of this discussion, you want to take an eight second exposure of a dimly-lit scene, but for whatever reason, you don’t want to use a cable release and count off the seconds. Not a problem. Just set your shutter speed dial to B and the collar surrounding the shutter release to T (See Illustration 1). Advance the self timer to the 8 second mark (See illustration 2). Then, trip the shutter using a cable release. (Do not push the button above the self-timer; as this will cause the self-timer to work in its usual fashion.) The shutter opens and the self-timer activates, timing out eight seconds. When the self-timer finishes, the shutter closes. Presto! A mechanical, eight-second exposure.
For those of you who do have one qi of the finders with low-light metering -ability, you may be nodding your head right about now and thinking, “So that’s what that slow speed ring is for.”
