The name Nikon has been synonymous with top quality 35mm SLR professional cameras for more than two decades. It came as something of a shock, therefore, to the photo world when they introduced the EM, aimed fair and square at the hobbyist.

To go with the camera Nikon also introduced a new set of ‘E’ series lenses. These will match up fully with any other Nikon body which accepts Auto Indexing (Al) optics. The camera is not only considerably smaller than we have come to expect from Nikon but the use of aluminium alloys and polycarbonates in the body have reduced the weight. This does not mean that the EM is any less robust than others from the same manufacturer - but I wouldn’t want to treat it too roughly.

The finish is the professional-looking black, there is no chrome version available.

By Nikon standards the top plate is absolutely Spartan. For the first time SLR user there is a reassuring absence of clutter and high-technology gizmo. At the left hand end is the re-wind crank, surrounded by the film speed selector. This runs from 25 to 1600 and is marked in ASA only.

The hot-shoe has two additional contacts for matching up with Nikon flash units such as the SB-E Speed-light or the new breed of independently dedicated guns.

The wind-on lever has a slightly unusual design. It is hinged in the middle but works very well. At the centre of the hub of this lever is the shutter release button, which is a decent size and threaded for a cable release. First pressure on this switches on the camera’s metering system.

Beside the wind-on lever is the mode selector with a choice of three positions. Running from front to back there is B for brief time exposures, M90 which is a mechanical speed of 1/90sec and is meant mainly for flash use, but is handy if this otherwise totally power-
reliant camera were to run through a set of batteries halfway up a mountain. The last position is auto which throws it into its normal aperture priority automatic mode.

To the left is the battery check button and LED which shows all is well. You would soon know if the cells were dead as the camera wouldn’t work.

At the extreme right is the frame counter which is additive and zeros automatically when the back is opened.

The viewfinder indication of the shutter speed is by pointing needle. As with so many of these cameras the speeds are stepless and run between 1/1000 and 1 sec. Should the aperture selected need a shutter speed of faster than 1/1000 or slower than 1/30, where camera shake could present a problem, there will be an audible warning ‘bleep’. For the true beginner there is a mark opposite 1/60 and 1/125 sec to show the ‘safest’ speeds.

On the front right of the body is the self timer which will give a variable delay of up to 10 seconds. On the front left is the exposure compensation button. When this is depressed it will give an extra 11/2 stops exposure therefore only really dealing with back-lit shots. This must be held in during exposure to ensure there is no chance of it being left on.

The camera handles well and the Nikon designers clearly worked on an entire new concept rather than a strip-down model. The SPD meter is reliable and quick in response.

The Nikon standard lenses have always set an excellent standard and the ‘E’ version gives just as high quality as its predecessors.

For the first time SLR buyer this camera offers exceptional value for money and its ease of handling and operation make it an ideal starter.
