The Nikon F

The original Nikon F was introduced in 1959. In its various derivations, the F was in production for fifteen years with over nine hundred fifty thousand units produced. Nikon had already begun to assemble a loyal following of
professionals with their fine line of rangefinder cameras by the time the F was introduced. But it was the F, with its system concept and robust construction - along with a healthy dose of shrewd marketing - that was largely responsible for earning Nikon its world-wide reputation as a builder of rugged, professional quality equipment - a reputation that has endured for over thirty-five years.
There have been many misconceptions about the serial numbering system Nikon instituted with the F and continued with the F2. This misconception often leads to misunderstandings and warrants clarification, so that which follows is a brief explanation: Serial numbering for the Nikon F began at 6400001. During the mid-to-late 1960’s, as a matter of coincidence, the first two digits of the serial numbers began to approximate the years of manufacture. Some people say that when this took place, Nikon adopted it into their numbering process and from then on the first two digits of a camera’s serial number reflected its year of manufacture.
Others claim that the serial number on a later camera could differ by as much as a couple of years from the actual date of manufacture. Either way, there is no disputing the fact that the numbers remained close, and it does seem probable that once the coincidence occurred there was some intentional design on Nikon’s part to keep the numbers close to the year of manufacture.

Now that serious collecting interest in the Nikon F has begun to emerge, this serial numbering system can also have a demonstrative affect on the value of a camera. Very early Fs with serial numbers that begin with 64 have become highly collectible. The lower this number is, the higher the camera’s value. Be forewarned, though - countefeits do exist. In this guide, I will show separate price listings for Fs with serial numbers that are less than 6499999 but greater than 6410000. If you have an F with a serial number below 6410000 or are contemplating buying one, I would recommend that you seek out the services of a knowledgeable and reputable collector or dealer to insure that the correct value is established, and that it is indeed the genuine article. Fs with very low serial numbers, say below 6401000, can command prices in the multiple thousands of dollars, so it would behoove you to do your homework before venturing into such deep waters.

Other variations have begun to affect price due to collecting interests and are now reflected in the following
listings. Currently, those Fs that are affected are those with a red dot next to the serial number, and Fs which have F2-style film-advance levers and self-timers.

The Nikon F Red Dot, as it has come to be called by collectors, is identified by a red dot next to the serial number. This dot was used only during production runs of cameras with serial numbers beginning with 65 or 66. It was intended as a visual means of identifying which cameras had come from the factory pre-modified to accept the then-new Photomic metered finder. There were some 20,000 Fs made with serial numbers beginning with 65, but only about 3,500 or so with serial numbers beginning with 66. Obviously, a 66 Red Dot will command a hefty premium over more pedestrian 66s, or even 65 Red Dots.
