Nikon Pronea 6i

The Pronea 6i was designed so that anybody who can read can pick one up and start taking great pictures immediately. It was also designed so that the well-seasoned photographer-cum-gad-geteer can just as easily access its comprehensive array of features. The key to this seemingly mutually exclusive pair of operating modes is the BASIC/ ADVANCED selector switch (an idea borrowed from the N50) located atop the camera on the left-hand side. Set to BASIC, the Pronea 6i becomes an inter-changeable-lens point & shoot APS camera. Set to ADVANCED, and the Pronea 6i affords the photographer with an in-depth assortment of user-settable features and controls.

Nikon has elected to retain the classic F-mount with the Pronea 6i, although only AF Nikkors and the new line of Nikkor IX lenses will work with the camera. Currently, Nikon is offering a 20-60mm f/3.5-5.6D, a 24-70mm f/3.5-5.6D, and a 60-180mm f/4-5.6D in the new line of compact lenses.

The following APS features are some of those supported on the Pronea 6i (please refer to the beginning of the APS section for more information): Mid-Roll Change, data imprinting of camera settings (aperture, shutter speed, exposure mode, film speed), date imprinting, 99 titles in 12 languages, and selectable print quantity (0-7). Of course, the 6i supports H, P, and C formats, as well. The 6i also supports the “Series Scene” feature, a command that is passed to the photofinishing equipment, instructing it not to compensate for over- or underexposure. The Series Scene feature is available for bracketing either ambient or flash exposures.

The AE system on the 6i employ’s Nikon’s proven advanced Cross-Type
Wide-Area Autofocus Sensor module, the same technology found in the N70 and N90s. AF modes include single-shot AF with focus priority, or continuous AF with release priority, as well as focustracking (servo) to 3.3 fps. Focus area selection is switchable between Wide-Area AF (7mm horizontal and 3mm vertical focus-detection area with 3mm central cross autofocus area) and Spot AF for precise placement of the AF sensor.

The exposure system on the 6i is equally comprehensive. It has a variety of program modes, which include a basic mode, program with shift, and six Vari-Program modes: portrait, hyperfocal, landscape, close-up, sport, and silhouette. Shutter- and aperture-priority AE, and metered manual are also available. Flash exposure features include TTL flash AE, Nikon’s Matrix Balanced Fill-Flash, flash bracketing, rear-curtain sync, slow sync, and red-eye reduction. Other exposure options include ±5 EV exposure compensation in fi-stop increments, AE lock, and auto exposure bracketing. The 6i’s metering system allows a choice between Nikon’s 8-segment 3D Matrix metering, centerweighted metering with a 65/35 balance, and a tight 3.5mm spot. Shutter speeds range from 30 seconds to 1 /4000 second, with flash sync at 1/180 second. The 6i’s built-in popup flash (GN 33 at ISO 100) covers the format down to 20mm. The camera also has an accessory flash shoe.

Other features include the following: a high-eyepoint viewfinder with 20mm eye-relief, single and continuous film advance settings with a top speed of 3.5 fps, auto ISO setting with override capability, a threaded mechanical cable release socket, three-setting memory recall, unlimited multiple exposures, and a light for the large back LCD panel.
