For deep sea photography there is no better camera than the Nikonos. It offers interchangeable lenses, aperture priority automatic exposure and will operate to a depth of 50 metres.

For those accustomed to land based cameras this may seem a little awkward to operate at first. Since it is designed to be used either when wearing gloves or when movement is restricted the controls are large but well laid-out and easily accessible. They are also arranged in a fairly conventional manner.

The standard lens is a 35mm f/2.5 which can be changed for a 28mm or 80mm. Special Nikonos lenses are used which are not interchangeable with the normal Nikon lens - submerging any of them would do them no good at all. These cannot be changed under water and the lens to be used must be fitted to the camera body before diving.

Focusing is carried out by means of a knob on the side of the lens mounting and is shown on a scale in meters only, below the lens.

The main mode selector dial is on the camera’s top plate and has four positions: A, which means the camera is in full auto operation, an aperture is selected and the focal plane shutter then delivers the correct speed; M, which is for a mechanical speed of 1 /90 and is used in the case of battery failure or for the synchronisation of non dedicated flash guns (the Nikonos will accept dedicated guns); B for longer exposure which would be best attempted on dry land and R for re-winding the film into its cassette.

These settings are on a ring around the film wind-on lever which operates in a single stroke like any conventional SLR.
On the user’s left of the top plate is the film speed setting around the folding re-wind lever.

The viewfinder offers relatively full information and is in many ways similar to that of an SLR. There is a warning LED for shutter speeds of slower than 1/30 sec indicating possible camera shake, LEDs giving flash information when used with dedicated units and parallax correction lines to remind one that this is a viewfinder camera.

Metering is by means of Silicon cells which operate through the lens at the working aperture. There is no need for open aperture metering with a viewfinder camera.

The heart of the system is the sealing between the back and the body. This prevents the entrance of water, even tiny droplets would be disastrous if they were to enter the system. The camera is made waterproof by an O-ring which is rather like a rubber gasket. There are four of these and the camera comes complete with a spare set which must be kept as clean as possible at all times, fitted with care and carefully greased before use.

This is a first rate adventure camera and could be used in conditions where you would think twice about using a conventional model - on a sandy beach, in the pool or even on a snow-covered slope. It is fairly expensive, but remember that you are buying an extremely versatile machine. The Nikonos is really an underwater camera designed for the use of Scuba divers and similar and is the best there is - the other uses are a bonus but it would be hard to justify the cost on the basis of these alone.
