NEW KONICA TC HAS DX, MORE

MANUFACTURER’S SPECIFICATIONS: 
Konica TC-X single-lens reflex, 
LENS: 50mm f/1.8 Konica Hexanon AR interchangeable bayonet mount #710574, focus to 18 in., accepts 55mm threaded accessories. 
SHUTTER: Mechanically-controlled Copal focal-plane with speeds from 1/8 sec. to 1/1000 sec. and B. X-sync to 1/60 sec., mechanical self-timer. 
EXPOSURE SYSTEM: CdS cell atop pentaprism reads centerweighted area of focusing screen; 
ISO/ASA 501600. Shutter-preferred auto-exposure with metered manual mode. 
VIEWFINDER: Non-interchangeable eye-level prism with central split-image rangefinder, microprism collar, matte outer area. Needle indicates correct-exposure of apertures from f/1.4 to f/22, over-and-under-expo-sure warnings; red manual operation indicator. 
OTHER FEATURES: DX automatic film speed setting with manual override. Operational at all shutter speeds without battery power. Polycarbonate chasis with built-in grip. Non-dedicated hot-shoe. 
BATTERIES: One AAA alkaline. 
PRICE: $159.50 body only; $258.50 with 50mm f/1.8 Konica Hexanon AR lens; $339.50 with 50mm f/1.4 Konica Hexanon AR lens. Back in August, 1976, Konica introduced the TC, one of the first entry level shutter speed-preferred auto-exposure SLR's. A compact, budget priced camera with abbreviated slow shutter speeds (1/8-1/1000 sec.), it featured a die-cast .metal chassis, mechanically-controlled auto exposure plus full manual control. It sold steadily until production was officially discontinued over 7 years later in December 1983. By contemporary photo industry standards that’s an incredibly long lifetime for a camera design, and a clear indication that much was right with the original TC.

While the TC’s sales perked right along, Konica ventured forth into the high tech world of polycarbonate-clad SLR’s with and without built-in motor drives, and has continued to develop a wide range of autofocus and point-and-shoot leaf shutter 35’s. Now, they have finally turned their attention back to the widely imitated TC concept and the result is the TC-X, basically an updated TC that uses a molded polycarbonate chassis and includes The TC-X is also noticeably smaller and much lighter than the mostly metal TC—13.2 oz instead of 26 oz. Nevertheless, the TC-X is a classic example of “The more things change, the more they remain the same,” for beneath its sleek and stylish exterior lurks a mechanism that has its roots in the Konica Autoreflex of 1967—a mechanical, shutter-preferred automatic with manually settable f/stops and shutter speeds.

Take the TC-X in hand and you will notice several new features immediately. Its surface is now smooth, matte polycarbonate instead of the TC’s traditional leatherlike covering. There is a comfortable built-in grip which, when you turn the camera over, reveals a compartment for a single AAA battery, which powers the DX and metering systems.

The controls on the TC-X are conventionally arranged. The only controls on the front are a mechanical self-timer lever settable for a 10 sec. delay, and a lens release button. On top, the knurled shutter-speed dial is located under the non-ratcheted film wind lever. The selection of shutter speeds is, as in the TC, abbreviated at the slow end, ranging from Vs to V,ooo sec. and B. The X-sync speed has also been reduced from 1/12s to 1/60 sec. A questionable change is the removal of the PC receptacle—you now have to rely solely on the non-dedicated hot shoe. A simple on-off power switch is conveniently located behind the large shutter release button. The ISO/ASA dial has been moved to the left side. This manual control overrides the DX system, letting you alter film speed ratings or set film speeds for non-DX cartridges. However, Kodachrome 25 lovers and other slow film users are left out in the cold— neither DX nor manual film speed setting will help you get below ISO/ASA 50.

The frame counter is small but legible, and is located at the back of and below the film wind lever. A film verification window is built into the hinged back. The only metal part, a judicious choice, is the tripod socket plate which is attached by screws to the polycarbonate baseplate. Users can confidently attach the TC-X to tripods without fear of damage to its inner workings—overly long screws simply can't be screwed in past a certain point.

When you open the camera back in the usual pull-up-the-rewind-crank fashion, you’ll notice two important new features: all visible main body parts inside the camera are polycarbonate, and in the film-loading chamber there’s a row of six DX contact pins. These pins '‘read" the code off DX-coded cartridges and automatically key the film speed into the camera’s exposure system. Loading is conventional, with a convenient multi-slotted take-up spool. The metal-bladed Copal shutter, which travels vertically, looks nearly identical to the one in the original TC.

Before we start shooting, let’s take a look at the Konica's Hexanon 50mm f/1.8 lens. The awkward two-handed mount lock release of the TC has been replaced with a simpler one at the base of the lens mount. Press the tab with your middle finger and turn in one smooth 45° counterclockwise motion to remove the lens. The bayonet mount will accept all Konica's Hexanon lenses and independently-made optics in Konica mount. The 50mm f/1.8, the standard lens, is compact and easy to use with its knurled focusing and aperture rings although there is no lock to prevent you from moving the aperture ring past f/22 to the AE (auto-exposure) setting. However, once in AE, the ring won’t turn back until you've pressed a tab on the left side of the aperture ring. To mount the lens, place red dots together and rotate the lens clockwise 70° until it locks.

The TC-X employs Konica’s classic mechanical shutter-preferred metering system. To use it, set the shutter speed, set the lens to AE and the camera chooses the proper-exposure aperture for the lighting conditions. The camera-selected aperture is read out by an analog needle and vertical aperture scale on the left side of the viewfinder. If there is too much or too little light, the needle will go off the scale into the zone above or below the numerals. If this happens, rotate the shutter-speed dial until the needle moves back into the aperture number area. The widest aperture of the lens mounted on the camera is indicated by a triangular marker which moves into place atop the f/stop scale. If the needle reaches this marker, you’ve got to select a slower shutter speed to get it into the "useable aperture” zone. If the needle fails to respond at all when there is enough light to shoot, you’re out of battery power—there’s no separate battery check button.

Fortunately, even if you are out of juice, the camera remains fully functional (but meterless). To use the TC-X sans battery power, turn on the power switch (it doubles as a shutter lock) and turn the lens aperture ring to any setting other than AE. Consult your local hand-held meter or exposure guide, and set the shutter speed manually. In this day and age of digital and pushbutton entry level cameras that take control out of the user's hands, the Konica's full manual, mechanical backup is a rarity in its class. Among its many virtues: It familiarizes beginners with the basic photographic concepts of aperture and shutter speeds in a “hands on" practical way.

Of course you don't need a dead battery to operate the TC-X manually. You can override the AE simply by turning your aperture ring off the AE setting to any manual f/stop. Turn your shutterspeed dial to the speed you want and the needle still will point the proper-exposure f/stop—set the lens to that f/stop and you have just set a "metered manual” exposure. Of course you're free to ignore the camera's recommendation and set any f/stop.

The TC-X’s focusing screen has a central split-image rangefinder surrounded by a usably broad microprism collar. The view through the finder is clear, and the screen is of average brightness, with good image contrast. However, once you complete the pleasant task of focusing and press the release, you’ll discover that the TC-X’s shutter is definitely on the loud side and makes a clattering sound at most shutter speeds. If you're taking pictures where noise doesn’t matter, that’s fine. But if you intend to photograph concert pianists or sleeping babies a quieter camera would be preferable.

Fortunately the TC-X's virtues far outweigh its niggling faults. It handles very well indeed. We found the wind lever operated smoothly, as did the rewind crank, although setting the shutter-speed dial can be a bit fiddly as it’s positioned underneath the wind lever. With a little practice, however, everything “falls readily to hand." The entire focusing screen is visible to eyeglass wearers, as are all infinder readouts. The shutter release button requires a moderately heavy touch, but is smooth and consistent in operation. The light, well balanced body and the built-in grip allowed us to hold the camera securely. The result: shakefree pictures at slow handholda-ble speeds of 1/30 and even 1/15 sec.

To sum up, although the TC-X breaks no new ground with any single feature, its combination of non-metal body, DX code reading capabilities, and classic manual controls and metering system make it an ideal “back to basics" model for beginning amateurs who intend to learn more about photography. The TC-X marries contemporary styling, design and materials with traditional controls, giving both purists and novices a measure of satisfaction.

Of course in choosing a rather inexpensive entry level SLR one of the things you give up is a system. The TC-X accepts neither a winder nor a dedicated flash, and the body lacks a depth-of-field preview control. However, when you figure how much you do get for the money, the TC-X is impressive. If you're a beginner or simply need an inexpensive Konica body, the TC-X is certainly worthy of consideration. (September 1985)