Non-hardening, liquid concentrate rapid fixer for black & white films and traditional RC and FB photographic papers.

    Liquid concentrate film and paper rapid fixer
    Suitable for specialist and scientific materials
    Easy and convenient to use
    Not compatible with hardeners
    Available in 500ml, 1lt and 5lt bottles

Product Description

ILFORD RAPID FIXER is a non-hardening, easy to use, rapid fixer. This versatile chemistry is supplied as a liquid concentrate and is suitable for all black & white film and darkroom paper fixing in both manual and machine processing applications.

A 5-litre bottle of RAPID FIXER concentrate makes enough working strength fixer solution to fix 600 x 135-36 black & white films or 2000 x 20.3x25.4cm (8x10in) resin coated (RC) prints or 1000 x 20.3x25.4cm (8x10in) fibre based (FB) prints.

RAPID FIXER must not be used with fix hardeners. Please refer to the technical data sheet for mixing instructions and fixing times.

Mixing instructions
Working strength ILFORD RAPID FIXER solutions
can be mixed either manually or by using
automatic solution mixing equipment. If automatic
mixing equipment is used follow the equipment
manufacturer’s recommendations and advice.

Note Photographic chemicals are not hazardous
when used correctly. It is recommended that
gloves, eye protection and an apron or overall are
worn when handling and mixing all chemicals.
Always follow the specific health and safety
recommendations on the chemical packaging.
Photochemical material safety data sheets
containing full details for the safe handling,
disposal and transportation of ILFORD chemicals
are available from ILFORD agents or directly from
the ILFORD web site at. www.ilfordphoto.com
For all film fixing applications ILFORD RAPID FIXER
is diluted 1+4 with water.

For use as a fixer in paper processing machines
ILFORD RAPID FIXER is diluted 1+4 with water but
for manual fixing applications it can be diluted
either 1+4 or 1+9

Fixer concentrates do not readily mix with water,
to ensure a working strength solution performs
correctly it is very important to stir it thoroughly
during mixing. When making solutions make sure
that the mixing vessel is large enough for the
volume of solution to be mixed and stirred.
Measure out the required amount of fixer
concentrate and water accurately. Pour the
concentrate into the mixing vessel and gradually
add the water while stirring.

Ensure that all utensils, processing tanks or
dishes/trays and mixing vessels are thoroughly
rinsed and cleaned before mixing fresh batches of
ILFORD RAPID FIXER particularly if it is being used
for the first time. Wash out the mixing vessels
thoroughly after use.
After filling a processor with fresh ILFORD RAPID
FIXER tank solution, switch it on and allow it to get
up to temperature and circulate the solutions. After
the working temperature is reached leave it re-
circulating for at least 10 minutes to ensure the
fresh chemicals are thoroughly mixed before
attempting to process any film or paper. Always
replace the tank covers used on the process and
replenishment solutions.

pH and specific gravity
The following table gives the pH and specific
gravity (SG) for fresh, working strength ILFORD
RAPID FIXER. These figures were obtained under
carefully controlled laboratory conditions and may
differ slightly from measurements made by users in
their own working areas. Users should make their
own control measurements from their own
accurately mixed fresh solutions for later
comparison. Ideally a pH meter should be used to
measure solution pH but if one is not available pH
measurement sticks can be used. These are
available in various pH ranges and those covering
a range from pH 4 to pH 6 are sufficient. SG can
be measured by using a hydrometer and one
covering the range from 1.000 to 1.200 is useful
for a wide range of photographic process
solutions.

