Canonflex RP

Having realised that an interchangeable viewfinder was really required by very few professionals and was not really appreciated anyway, the designers of the Canonflex decided to produce a more economic model to the Canonflex R 2000, with a fixed prism and l/1000s shutter. Similarly to the rangefinder Canon P, the camera was called the Canon RP, where P stood for “Popular”. The Canonflex RP was identical in appearance to the Canonflex, but differed from the other model in the single moulding of the top plate, which included the pentaprism cover and was all chromed, and in the self timer lever, which was similar to that of the rangefinder models and replaced the removable key. The Canonflex RP used the same clip on light meter as the original Canonflex and was offered in two versions: chrome and black finish. In spite of its low price and the designation of “popular” camera, not even the Canon RP was a success on the market. As the Canonflex R 2000, the RP was also in production for 18 months, between June 1960 and January 1962, and was made in relatively higher numbers: 30,000 units.

The Canonflex RP is the last of the first generation Canonflex cameras. Following the end of production of this model, Canon abandoned the base plate mounted film wind lever and external coupled light meter. The next model, the Canonflex RM, while keeping the same name and lens mount, was a new design, featuring a top plate mounted film advance lever, an internal, coupled light meter and a new design. There was no looking back. With this model, Canon aimed squarely at the amateur market. After two years in production, the Canonflex RM was replaced by the well known Canon FX model, which was the first to use the new camera-lens coupling that remained in production for over ten years, when the successful Canon FTb was announced. It was only ten years after the demise of the Canonflex R 2000, that Canon addressed the professional market again with the Canon F1, the success of which is in some measure due to the wisdom gained from the negative experience of the irreplaceable, but unlucky Canonflex product line.
