In one form or another the K1000 is just about the longest surviving camera on the market. In this form it first saw the light of day in 1976, before that we knew it as the Spotmatic F, when it had the old 42mm screw mount lenses and was one of the most popular cameras ever.

This is considerably larger and heavier than other cameras from the same manufacturer. It relies on CdS for metering with swinging needle indication of the exposure showing in the finder. The lay-out of the controls is conventional and simple. This is a solid camera for those who want a straightforward model and its budget price tag means that it is a most attractive carrier for any ‘K’ mount lens.

The top plate is uncluttered and practical. At the left hand end is the re-wind knob with its angled, folding lever. This is used together with the button on the base. On the top of the pentaprism sits the hot-shoe, on this model there are no additional connections for the use of dedicted guns.

The shutter speed dial will turn a full circle and runs from 1 to 1/1000sec plus B. The synch speed of 1/60 has an X marked against it as a reminder, This is lifted and turned to alter the film speed setting, shown in a small window on the dial and marked in ASA running from 20 to 3200.

The shutter release button is threaded for a cable release and beside it is the Pentax window which shows a red signal when the film is advanced, the shutter cocked and all is ready to fire. The frame number is shown on the hub of the wind-on lever, this is plastic tipped and has a throw that is not as smooth as others in the Pentax range. Either a single action or a series of ‘inching’ strokes can be used and there is a
stand-off angle of 10°.

Apart from the P/C socket for a flash cable the front of the camera is bare of controls. There is no self timer and no depth of field preview. However it must be remembered that this is a budget camera and such additions would increase the price.

The base of the camera carries only the tripod bush, the housing for the single battery and the re-wind button. The back is bare.

Loading is carried out in the conventional way-this camera does not have the Pentax ‘Magic Needle’ loading system.

Metering is straightforward and quick to operate. At the edge of the focusing screen is a U marker with + and - signs. When the swinging needle is positioned between these two the exposure will be correct. If it is to one side or the other (or rather above or below the gap) an adjustment to either the aperture ring on the lens or to the shutter speed will bring it right - this is metering at its most simple and easy to use.

Rather than the 50mm f/1.7 lens that adorns the other cameras in the Pentax range this has an f/2 optic - it gives perfectly good results but is somewhat slower and therefore cheaper.

The K1000 takes no form of accessory drive mechanism but will accept the full range of Pentax, and other, ‘K’ mount lenses and accessories such as bellows and extension rings.

This is a basic machine with few frills and no luxuries. However for the would-be photographer on a limited budget or the Pentax owner wanting a second body with the minimum of refinements I can think of no better camera.
