The MX along with its auto only stablemate the ME, were the first compact cameras from Pentax. The designers at Asahi just managed to scrape the MX in below the size and weight of the Olympus OM1.

The MX has a metal body covered in a leather type fabric. The controls are conventionally positioned and users of other, older style, SLRs will find that everything falls easily to hand.

By modern standards the top plate is almost bare -particularly when compared to the clutter of so many auto/manual outfits which are more like the flight deck of an airliner than the basis of picture taking.

The left hand end has the re-wind knob with its folding crank lever. On top of the pentaprism is the hot-shoe, this has no contacts for dedicated flash, which cannot be used with this camera.

The shutter speed dial has a range of speeds from 1 to 1 /1 OOOsec and B. The speed for synching electronic flash is 1/60sec and this speed has an X marked against it as a reminder. Both speeds are in orange. A small cut-out window on this dial displays the film speed which can be set from 25 (marked by a dot only) to 1600ASA. In front of this dial is the film ready signal which shows red when the frame is advanced, the shutter cocked and all ready to shoot. Beside this is the shutter release button threaded to take a cable release. Around the outside is a locking collar.

The wind-on lever is plastic tipped at the end and the film can be advanced either in a single throw or by inching in a series of short steps. The frame counter is additive and self-zeroing when the back is opened.

On the front right of the body is a dual function control. A lever stands up from a hub, when this is pushed inwards the lens is stopped down for depth of field preview, turned the other way it is the mechanical self timer with a delay of up to about 10 seconds.
To the left of the lens are two P/C flash terminals, these are for FP class flash bulbs and X for electronic units.

The metering system relies on Gallium Arsenide Phosphorous cells. These are claimed to be 1000 times faster in response than CdS and less sensitive to infra-red than Silicon. I have always found them excellent but Pentax have dropped them in favour of Silicon in more recent models.

The meter is switched on by a first pressure on the shutter release button, as long as it is held the metering operates. For longer periods of metering the wind-on lever can be moved to its stand-off position which will switch the meter on until the lever is returned.

Five LEDs give the viewfinder information of exposure. These are beside the revolving shutter speed scale. When the camera is set for correct exposure the central, green LED lights. If the exposure is V2 stop under or over exposed an orange LED above or below the green lights up. When exposure is a full stop or more out a red LED lights up.

The aperture set on the lens barrel is reflected into the upper part of the finder frame by means of a ‘Judas Window’.

The screens are interchangeable by means of a pair or tweezers supplied with accessory screens.

The camera will accept either a full power motor drive giving up to five frames per second or an autowinder giving up to two frames per second.

The whole is contained in a body weighing only 1 lb 10ozs (736g) complete with lens. It may prove too small for many photographers switching from the older, larger cameras of a previous generation but for those wanting a manual camera, in the exposure setting as well as the firing means this is well worth consideration.
