For those wanting to use a camera capable of giving the highest quality results without having to go to too much trouble - this is the one. It is the easiest to use aperture priority camera available, giving the minimum of information on exposure.

In many ways this is a basic version of the ME but without the shutter speed indication in the finder - this camera simply tells you whether it is safe to shoot or not.

The top plate should not confuse even the least technical of photographers. The re-wind knob is at the left hand end and is surrounded by the film speed selector. This runs in ASA only from 32 to 1600.

The hot-shoe sits on top of the pentaprism housing and an extra contact allows for the use of dedicated flash units to set the shutter speed automatically.

The exposure mode selector is around the shutter release button. There are three choices of setting: auto; 100X, which is a mechanical speed of 1/100sec for flash synch and use when the batteries fail, and B which is also mechanical, for brief exposures. There is no lock position.

The shutter release is threaded for the use of a cable release.

In front of the wind-on lever is the frame counter. This is additive and zeros when the back is opened. Besides the B on the selector dial is a window which shows an orange signal when the film is advanced and the next shot ready to fire. This insures that your film is wound on and that you won’t miss a shot.

On the front right of the body is the delayed action self timer. This is mechanical and depending on how far it is cocked the delay could be adjusted between four and 12 seconds.

The back is opened by lifting the re-wind knob to
reveal fiilm loading by the Pentax ‘Magic Needle’ system - one of the most efficient around. The back is removable for the use of a Data Back.

This camera differs slightly from the others in the M series in that the standard lens is the f/2 50mm rather than an f/1.7. However the results are certainly up to the high Pentax standard.

The metering system relies on Silicon Photo Diodes (SPD) cells and the indication that they give marks the big difference between this camera and others.

An aperture is selected on the lens - if this will result in correct exposure from a shutter speed of between 1 /1000 and 1 /30sec a green LED will glow on the right of the finder screen. If a speed of faster that 1 /1000 is needed, over exposure would result and a red LED will glow as a warning. Where a speed of slower than 1/30 is needed there is an orange LED which glows as a warning of possible camera shake, but the camera will still fire.

This is all the information the camera provides -there is no indication of what shutter speed is to be used.

The screen has the usual focusing aids of a split image centre spot surrounded by a microprism collar.

The whole package is slightly larger than the Pentax ME but is still reasonably light and compact.

This camera is ideal for the photographer who wants interchangeable lenses, the use of an autowinder and the opportunity of using close-up accessories such as extension tubes or bellows without having to worry about seemingly complicated exposure calculations.

Many photographers have criticised the MV1 on the grounds that it is too simple but it is aimed solely at the photographer who wants to concentrate on images without worrying over technicalities.
