The Pentax ME was the first camera to be introduced without a shutter speed dial. At first the other manufacturers were scathing but soon brought out their own versions when they realised its success.

With the ME Super Pentax have notched another first on their already well marked belt. This has no shutter speed dial but a full range of manual shutter speeds which are selected by means of two push buttons.

This is a compact, lightweight camera which offers top range specification in its tiny body. The left hand end of the top plate is conventional with a folding re-wind crank and surrounding exposure override control for use in the auto mode. This gives a + or -two stops control and there is viewfinder confirmation that this facility is in use.

At the rear of this knob is the film speed selector. Shown in ASA only it runs from 12 to 1600, but if the override control were used the whole time it could be extended to 6 to 6400ASA.

The hot-shoe sitting on the pentaprism housing has one additional contact for use with a dedicated flash.

To the right of the housing are the two buttons which give this camera its character and the mode selector dial. The positions are marked L, Auto, M 125X and B. L is locked and is a most useful position. When this is selected, the master system is switched off and the shutter cannot be fired. This means that there is no chance of the camera being accidentally switched on by other items of equipment in the gadget bag which would result in expensive and potentially disastrous battery drain.

With Auto, the desired aperture is selected on the lens barrel and the correct shutter speed is given step-lessly between 1/2000 and 4secs. The additional fastest speed will prove most useful for any photographer wanting to freeze fast moving action.

M is manual and employs the two buttons. Metering still works as normal in manual but the photographer has full control over the speed. When switched to manual a single tap on the forward button will increase the shutter speed by one step (e.g. from 1/125 to 1/250). If you want to run through several steps just hold the button down and watch the finder LEDs flash.

125X is for the synchronisation of non-dedicated flash units and will also save on needless battery drain whilst loading the first few frames of a roll. B is for brief
time.

Beside the shutter release button, which is threaded to take a cable release, is the Pentax ‘shutter cocked’ signal. This shows red when the frame is advanced and the camera ready to fire.

The screen is not changeable and has a centre spot split image surrounded by a microprism collar. Down the side of this are the metering system LEDs.

On the auto setting the lamp next to the nearest whole shutter speed to the one in use glows. Shutter speeds of 1/60sec and faster have green LEDs and those of 1/30 and slower orange, to warn of possible camera shake.

In the manual mode a green LED by an M lights to show that manual has been selected. The LED beside the chosen shutter speed also lights up - if this will result in under or over exposure it will flash. Changing the aperture or shutter speed will sooner or later result in the correct exposure when the LED will stop flashing.

The ME Super follows on its two predecessors the ME and the MX in using lightning fast Gallium Arsenic Phosphorous cells for the metering system. To switch on a first pressure on the shutter release must be given and then all lights reguired will glow for about 30 seconds.

There is a self timer on the front of the body the timing of which can be set between four and 10secs depending on how far it is ‘cocked’.

The film is loaded with the Pentax ‘Magic Needle’ system - as quick and easy as any I’ve found. There is also a most useful film advancing signal on the back of the top plate.

The ME Winder II will easily fit to the base of the camera and offers up to two frames per second continuous or single frame advancing. It will also take a remote cable release for distant firing and winding of the camera.

The standard lens is the 50mm f/1.7 which has click positions at full and half stops. Its construction is of six elements in five groups and focuses down to 11/2ft (0.45m). The Pentax has the ‘K’ bayonet lens mount which means there is the widest possible choice of lenses and accessories available.

This camera offer a tremendous specification in a tiny body.
