Over the years many of the advances made in the design of SLR cameras have come from Asahi Pentax. Yet they had never had a full professional specification model until the introduction of the LX in 1980. This brought interchangeable heads and screens, motor drive, dedicated flash and a brand new metering system and was aimed fair and square at the professional.

In general, professional photographers are pretty conservative and don’t go for such things as auto exposure and cameras totally reliant on battery power. The F3 will not do a lot without electric power but the LX has a range of shutter speeds from 1 /125 to 1 /2000 which are mechanical in the manual mode.

The layout of the controls will seem familiar enough to a photographer accustomed to any of the other major 35mm systems. The re-wind knob with its built-in folding lever is at the left hand end of the top plate, this also contains the window which shows the film speed setting in ASA from 6 to 3200. The exposure compensation control is here also, giving + and - two stops.

There are a choice of eight interchangeable viewfinders and eyepieces with differing viewing methods, variable dioptric power eyepieces for those whose eyesight requires it and with and without hot-shoes.

The shutter speed dial is deceptively conventional. Speeds run from 1/2000 to 4secs - when one is selected you are in the manual mode. Using the camera like this means that all shutter speeds between 1 /125 and 1 /2000 operate mechanically - even with the batteries removed (in which case there would be no metering).

The X position lies between 1 /60 and 1 /125 and is a speed of 1/75. The position marked automatic throws the camera into that mode where the shutter speeds are stepless and relate to the aperture selected on the lens. The last position on this dial is B.

In front and to the left of this is the red ‘shutter cocked’ indicator which is a particular favourite of the Asahi design team.

The shutter release is threaded for a cable release and has a turning collar which acts as a lock.

This camera has the most interesting frame counter of any available. It is additive in normal operation but as the film is being re-wound it turns back to zero in a series of click steps. This means that if you were on frame 32 and decided that you wanted to double expose on frame 27 you could wind back to it.
On the front of the body are four small silvered metal lugs, one at each corner. These allow an optional hand-grip to be fitted. There are two of these available; one moulded to fit the fingers, the other a blank which can be cut and shaped to the photographer’s individual grip. The carrying strap is also fitted to these lugs so the camera can be slung around the neck in the upright position by using both the lugs at one end of the body.

The self timer combines with a preview stop-down lever and the mirror lock up control. Also on the front of the body are two terminals for flash leads. One is a straight P/C for FP class bulbs, the other is also a P/C socket but has two additional contacts for the use of dedicated electronic units off camera or on a bracket.

The heart of the metering system is a Silicon Photo Diode in the base of the mirror box. This is fronted by a small light - gathering lens which reads the light from a secondary mirror. At the higher shutter speeds the light is read from a fixed pattern on the leading shutter curtain. At slower speeds the light is reflected from the film.

Looking through the viewfinder shows the aperture in use reflected from the barrel by means of a 'Judas Window’. To the right of the screen and in frame is the shutter speed scale. When in the auto mode an LED lights beside the shutter speed nearest to the one that will give correct exposure, this shutter works step-lessly up to four seconds. Longer exposure times than this are indicated by one collective setting marked LTB.

There are three coloured LEDs used here. Green for shutter speeds between 1/2000 and 1/30sec which can be hand-held, yellow for 1/15 to 4secs as a warning of possible shake and red for over exposure.

In the manual mode the shutter speed set is shown by a blue flag, the one that would give correct exposure is indicated by an LED - when the two coincide exposure will be correct.

There are eight screens available for specialist work. All points in the camera that are likely to be subject to dust or moisture have special sealing gadgets to minimise the risk of foreign bodies reaching the mechanical or electrical heart of the camera. This is backed up by an impressive system of accessories and lenses - certainly enough to describe this as a fully professional outfit.
