The Pentax 6X7 has taken the 35mm SLR philosophy and extended it to accept roll film giving 10 images 6 x 7cms on 120 film, or 20 on 220.

U has interchangeable finders and the standard gives TTL metering, in addition there is an extensive range of lenses and accessories available to make this a real system camera of high specification.

Any photographer having used a 35mm SLR camera will feel at home with this model. The lay-out and operation of the controls is very similar - it is just a much larger, more solid feeling machine. The shutter speed dial is on the left of the top plate and gives a range of speeds from 1 to 1 /1 OOOsec with an additional X setting for flash synch at 1/30sec and B for longer exposures.

The meter draws its power from the battery in the base of the camera but must be independently switched on. Indication of exposure is by a swinging needle below the screen which shows a scale marked + and -, if the needle is off the scale the settings are more than two stops out - once centred all is well and the shot can be taken.

The film is advanced by a wind-on lever that is exactly the same in action to that on 35mm models. The centre of this is the frame counter which must be set before the start of each roll. A second counter is on the back of the camera which shows the frame number on the film’s backing paper through a small red window rather in the style of a box camera.

The shutter release button is threaded to take a cable release and can be locked to avoid accidental
exposure.

The front of the camera is fairly straightforward. On the front right of the body is the mirror reset button. This is to lower the mirror if it becomes locked up at the time of battery failure. The mirror can be locked up before taking a shot to make the camera completely steady by means of a lever on the left hand side of the lens mount.

As well as the metering head there is a nonmetering and a waist level model available. The screens are interchangeable from a choice of five.

The shutter is an electronically controlled focal plane model and when this is fired the mirror returns instantly.

The standard lens is an f/2.4105mm Takumar, even though the maximum aperture is not nearly as large as on most 35mm standards, the viewfinder image is still a little darker than would be expected.

No roll film eye-level SLR can be as small as a 35mm and it is bound to be a lot heavier. However the balance is outstanding and even .using this camera for iong periods does not result in undue strain.

There is a wide selection of lenses available for this camera and the quality given by the standard is excellent.

This is a superb camera - it has stood the test of time very well and is still as popular as ever. The only reservation any potential buyer might have is the film format, a 6 x 7cms negative or slide is a large slice of film and gives only 10 exposures on a roll.
