A mantra that returns by all who look at this camera is its weight. It is heavy, at 500gr, but just 25gr heavier than the Nescon it is based upon. Its younger sister, the Halina 35X super, is 20% heavier at 600gr. It brings to mind the South African automotive industry. The manufacturers got government incentives per vehicle weight. So, the cars made there were heavier than their European / Japanese originals. This was a double-edged sword, as local parts would not fit the international models, so neither cars nor spares could be exported. Perhaps there was a similar incentive plan in Hong Kong as well.

The Halina 35X body clearly follows the Nescon / Soligor design. It is either a blatant copy or made under some agreement, which I doubt. Why copy that lackluster camera, I don’t know. Further, the Japanese would not have accepted such a scaled-down product if made under license.

The top housing is a trapezoid, whereas Nescon is square. Other than that, it is the same. The bottom wing lock is the same, as is the back cover. Only here does the pressure plate have a life of its own and need convincing to slide back in.

Where the Nescon metalwork is smooth and nicely satin chromed, the Halina metalwork is wavy and finished with shiny plating. The model name embossing is rough as if done by a trade school student. It does not affect the camera’s ability but hints at the production quality.

The lens assembly here slightly differs from the Nescon. The dial order is similar; closest to the body is the speed selector, then the focusing ring, with the aperture dial in front. Not a common order, which hints again at the similarity to the Nescon. The speed selector here is a dial, whereas, on the Nescon, it is a lever moving in a slot. It could have the same mechanism under the hood.

A lens-mounted shutter cocking lever is mounted at the NE side of the lens, the same as the Nescon. But, here, there is no double frame prevention, so you may cock the shutter without winding the film. Either oversight or making it simpler to produce. A modest speed selection B, 25-200 on a two-leaf shutter, with a 3.5/45 lens, completes the offering.

The camera tends to fall on its nose as the bottom lock is proud of the base, either bad design or poor workmanship. It could also be that the camera weight comes from the lens.

A later model marked Halina 35X Mark II came several years later, which is a rebrand of a Paulette. Marked “Made in Macau”, it shows that Hong Kong production has become too expensive, so it was contracted to mainland China.