Canon T70: Motorized, Computerized, Multi-Program 35mm SLR

MANUFACTURER’S SPECIFICATIONS: Canon T70 35mm single-lens reflex. Body No. 1004648. LENS: 50mm f/1.4 Canon FD in interchangeable bayonet mount, No. 6910535, apertures to f/22, focus to 18 in., accepts 52mm accessories. SHUTTER: Electronically-controlled, vertical travel electromagnetic attraction (EMAS) metal-blade focal-plane with speeds from 2 sec. to 1/1000 sec. and В, X sync at 1/90 sec., electronic self-timer. VIEWING: Non-interchangeable eye-level prism with split-image rangefinder, microprism collar, full area non-interchangeable screen. OTHER FEATURES: Auto loading. Two AA cells power auto wind, rewind, shutter mechanism and silicon photo cell metering circuit with cell above eyepiece. Dual cell measures either center-weighted or 11% central selective area for shutter-speed preferred, normal, wide or tele program auto-exposure mode, manual exposure or stop-down metered exposure. ASA 121600; out of range shutter-priority automatic speed shift, LCD panel atop camera indicates battery condition, film load, wind, film speed index, rewind, exposure mode, shutter speed, hand-hold speed limits, exposure limits, frame counter, bulb and self-timer second counter; finder LEDs indicate aperture set, program exposure warning, hand-holding and exposure limits, AE lock/selective area metering, manual exposure, flash ready and O.K. shutter-speed range in manual stop down metering mode, auto loading; hot shoe for dedicated, infrared pre-flash Canon autoflash units, remote control socket, removable eyecup, film box end reminder slot, built-in finger grips, shutter lock, provision for accessory data back with delayed interval release capabilities. MANUFACTURER: Canon Camera Co., Tokyo, Japan. IMPORTER: Canon USA, Inc., Lake Success, N.Y. 11040. PRICE: $538.00 with 50mm f/1.4 Canon lens; $470.00 with 50mm f/1.8 Canon lens.

For years many camera manufacturers have been eyeing what they consider a vast, untapped market—the photographer who wants to know little about photography and who wants to apply this lack of knowledge to the wondrous workings of the 35mm camera.

If you haven’t already noticed, full electronic control of SLRs has been creeping up on little pushbutton feet ever since the Pentax ME Super of 1979. While that camera used two buttons only to control manual speeds, it was evident that other controls would inevitably succumb to the faster acting multi-use pushbuttons. The Canon T70 represents, however, not only a giant step ahead in electronic camera control but also demonstrates the wide variety of possibilities and conveniences that such control can provide. With a push of the right button or slide of the switch, metering patterns can be varied, exposures locked, ASA speed film changed, exposure modes shifted from shutter preference to any of three different program exposures in which the camera makes the choice of shutter speed and aperture. Further, an LCD panel atop the camera offers graphic displays of what the camera is doing in a manner akin to that of a computer screen. It is a bravura electronic performance, fascinating even just to watch. But as a "user friendly” picture making instrument, what may it have sacrificed? Has it evolved too far too fast? These valid questions we hope to answer as well as furnish you with our usual analysis of the camera's capabilities. But let’s now begin where we must—at the beginning.

The basic configurations of the metal-bodied T70, whether discussing top, front or open back, are extremely close to that of the far less expensive, plastic bodied program-exposure-mode-oniy Canon T50 SLR. This might seem an odd parentage since the T70 is in no way a "bargain" or even a moderately priced camera. However, in terms of manufacturing rationalization—making the most of designer's and a factory’s abilities—the T70 can be well understood. The T series cameras are Canons most sophisticated advances into the future. They comprise those Canons with auto wind, auto load and heavy use of electronic operations. By employing much the same configuration, many needed mechanical parts providing similar operations can be shared by more than one camera, therefore keeping costs down to the manufacturer and inevitably to the consumer as well. A quick glance at the lens tripping mechanisms and auto loading devices of both reveal the near similarities and bear out our contentions.

Battery replacement is efficient and simple. No coin edge, no fingernail. Just pressure from a finger and the solidly locked bottom cover of the chamber flips open to accept two AA cells. Rather than indicating battery polarity with pictographs on the chamber walls where they can’t be seen easily, Canon has provided enameled indented + and -indicators on the metal springs of the cover which can be seen clearly even in poor light.

Loading is equally intelligent. Rather than pulling up on a rewind knob (not needed on this camera) a double catch on the camera end consisting of a button and slide lever can be managed nicely with a single finger. Then the back swings open. The film cartridge needs only a push into the chamber since there is no rewind spindle to raise out of the way. Move the film leader across the film plane making sure the leader perforations engage the sprocket teeth and close the back. (When the film leader is too long—and it sometimes is—you’ll have to re-roll a bit into the cartridge.) Immediately a series of soft winds and clicks occur as the camera advances film to frame 1. If you happen to be looking at the top panel LCD you will be fascinated by the film cartridge pictograph which shows the film leader extending outwards from the cartridge and winding until a large frame 1 appears. Incidentally, the cartridge pictograph only appears if there is film in the camera, and the winding signal only occurs if the film is winding properly.

Now it's time to set the ISO/ASA index. Push the ISO button on the left side of the camera. The film speed indication appears on the LCD. To reach a higher index push the “up" button on the right side of the camera. Too high, push the "down" button. The ASA indices will change one after the other until you get the right numeral. Numbers available are 12, 16, 25, 32, 40, 50, 64, 80, 100, 125, 160, 200, 250, 320, 400, 500, 640, 800, 1000, 1250, 1600—just about anything you might possibly need. You can recall the ASA index as a reminder whenever you wish by pressing the ISO button.

For most photography you will probably want average, center-weighted metering. Slide the control lever to average. Now let's pick a program. Push down the mode button and press either the up or down button. In succession you will see the word program with tele, then program alone, program with wide and finally a smallish TV, only in the upper left portion of the LCD panel. The three programs do not mean that you must use the program-only with a normal lens, tele with all tele lenses and wide with wide lenses, but are more of an indication just what the program selection of both shutter speeds and apertures favors. The diagram on top, right corner shows the exact shutter speeds and aperture of all three programs (plus the behavior of the shutter-speed preferred auto exposure which we’ll get to).

Basically the program-only is a compromise with shutter speeds and apertures rising equally on a 45° angle from 1 /8 sec. The wide-angle program rises on an equal angle but starts at 1/2 sec. rather than 1/8 sec. providing two f/stops less lens opening or, in more practical terms, two f/stops more depth of field for any given light intensity. Ergo the wide program gives you greater depth of field but slow shutter speeds for any given light level. As might be expected the tele program does just the opposite, keeping the lens at full aperture all the way up to between 1/125 sec. and 1 /250 sec. It then allows the lens to close rather swiftly at a steep diagram angle as light increases further. While tyros can certainly feel safe that they are usually getting the best programs for their shooting by matching wide-angle lens with wide-angle program and tele lens with tele program. More knowledgeable users will want to match the program more closely to their specific type of picture making.

The diagram indicates the programs for an f/1.4 lens, but you can easily figure out the programs for lenses with smaller apertures. Just enter the diagram at the left on the line indicating the maximum aperture of your lens and follow it horizontally until it bisects the program line. It then climbs the line just like the f/1.4 lens program.

Just what information is the camera giving you in its program modes? Slight pressure on the shutter release or the front preview button causes the shutter speed selected to appear on the LCD panel atop the camera, while within the viewfinder a green P (for program) LED appears to the right of the focusing screen, along with the red digital aperture setting. The exposure will change and so will the numerals on the LCD and in the finder as light on your subject changes. When the lowest possible shutter speed at which you should hand-hold an exposure is reached (1 / 125 sec. or slower in tele program, 1 /60 sec. in normal program and 1 /30 sec. or slower in wide-angle program) the P within the viewfinder will begin to blink in warning. Should the exposure be completely outside the possible range of the T70, the aperture will also blink and the shutter speed will blink atop the LCD panel.

Now let’s switch the mode to the TV setting already mentioned. This is the shutter-speed preferred mode in which you can choose your shutter speed and the metering system selects the aperture. Using the up and down buttons, any speed from 2 sec. to 1 /1000 can be selected and will appear on the LCD panel while the camera-selected aperture appears in the viewfinder. But the shutter preference auto-exposure system has a neat trick up its electronic sleeve. If you select a shutter speed but there isn't enough light to shoot at that speed even at maximum aperture, the camera will shift the selected shutter speed downwards to reach proper exposure. In other words, if you pick 1/125 sec. for instance, and the camera needed an aperture larger than f/1.4 for proper exposure, the camera will shift your 1/125 sec. numerically downwards to 1 /60 or further if necessary for proper exposure. When you press the shutter release slightly, the shifted speed appears on the LCD and the maximum aperture of the lens blinks in the viewfinder in warning. The same type of shift occurs if you've selected too slow a speed and the camera's minimum aperture isn’t small enough. Then the speed will be shifted numerically upwards. Naturally if the exposure is beyond any possible shutter speed and aperture combination'both shutter speeds and apertures blink.

We haven’t exhausted all our exposure possibilities yet. With the camera still set to TV (shutter-speed preferred), let’s push the aperture release button on the lens and move the scale off “A" to manual aperture settings. Immediately an "M” appears on the LCD panel. Within the viewfinder a blinking red "M" lights. The viewfinder continues to show the correct exposure aperture. You can either match this on the aperture ring of your lens or vary it as you wish. However, you can't meter and set the camera manually at eye level. You must set the aperture while looking at the lens.

The camera can physically be set manually when in a program mode but it won’t work properly. Keep it in the shutter-preferred mode for correct manual operation.

We have one more operational exposure mode. If you remove the camera lens to use the body with a bellows unit, with old Canon lenses (prior to the FD series) on a microscope or telescope, you must, of course, be able to make exposures at the microscope’s, telescope's or the stop down aperture of the lens on the bellows.

When you remove the lens from the camera another auto-exposure mode becomes available: stop-down aperture. While the instructions don’t say so, it’s really an aperture-preferred exposure mode in which the camera sets the proper shutter speed for whatever working aperture the accessory has. A small stop down iris diaphragm picto-graph appears on the LCD panel. The LCD panel shows the shutter speed to be set by the meter circuit. Within the viewfinder, the LEDs now read in shutter speeds from 2 sec. to 1/90. Then an H.L. appears indicating speeds from 1/125 sec. to 1 /350 sec. With brighter light an H.H. lights up, meaning the speeds are from 1/500 to 1/1000 sec. If you wish to use manual speeds with stop down exposure, you can by shifting to the shutter-speed preferred auto exposure mode in which you can set whatever speed you wish. However, you can’t meter in shutter-speed preferred auto exposure mode at stop down apertures.

So far all the exposure readings we’ve made have used center-weighted metering. But the T70 also offers a more selective central area reading in which the outer circle beyond the microprism indicates 11% of the total picture. This is for handling lighting situations such as backlight where you wish to exclude light outside the circle. With “selective area” readings the camera also provides an auto-exposure lock. Slight pressure on the shutter release or front preview button locks the exposure in place so you can make a closeup reading or you swing the camera away from its central reading to another composition while maintaining the same exposure (as long as you have finger pressure on the shutter release or preview button). When you press the shutter release fully, the camera will release at the exposure you’ve been holding. This is similar to the exposure memory hold levers or button on other SLRs. (The camera has no auto-exposure compensation dial.)

You can use the selective area metering with lock in any auto exposure mode by sliding the main switch to the partial (AEL) position. While there is no indication on the LCD panel that you’re using the AEL, you can, of course, see it by looking at your main switch position. Additionally, a red asterisk warning does light in the viewfinder.

The camera is capable of making two additional types of exposure: self-timed and bulb. As you might-expect from a camera like the T70, electronics are used in both to help furnish more information.

In any exposure mode, set the main switch to self-timer. Then press the shutter release. Immediately an audible beeper sounds and the frame counter of the camera shifts to indicate the 10 sec. countdown, second by second. From 2 sec. to the shutter’s release the beeper will increase its beep speed to warn you and the subject.

To make exposures longer than the maximum 2 sec. of the shutter range, set the camera to the TV shutter-priority mode. Press the down button until the word ''bulb" appears on the LCD panel. Set your aperture manually. Press the shutter release. The shutter will remain open as long as the button is kept pressed. However, the number of exposure seconds will be indicated for you on the lower right portion of the LCD panel. The numerals run from 1 to 30 seconds. After 30 sec. the numerals repeat but one of the film cartridge pictograph bars will appear indicating that 30 sec. has already been timed. Since there are three bars you can time exposures up to 120 sec. using the camera's built-in clock and visible timer.

A tyro certainly can be taught to run the T70 in a matter of minutes by setting the main camera switch to program and warning him/ her to make certain nothing blinks in the finder. But the full capabilities of the T70 can only be realized by a user willing to sit down with the excellently written and illustrated 70-page T70 instruction booklet and spend the time ingesting all the camera's abilities which we have just enumerated. Is this too much to expect of the average photographer? We once thought so when the Canon A-1, an equally complex electronic camera appeared in 1978. However, its vast success and its many enthusiastic owners convinced us that photographers will bend their abilities to such a learning process.

Before we give you our careful analysis plus field and lab results on the T70, we must describe two important accessories which become part of the integral Canon system.

The T70 uses a dedicated, three terminal hot shoe flash system something like that of the T50, employing a pre-exposure infrared flash which measures the distance from camera to subject and back and sets the flash accordingly. With the new Canon 277T flash this system yields very useful dividends. It automatically sets the T70’s shutter to the 1 / 90 sec. flash sync speed, selects the proper aperture from f/2 to f/22 for the distance during the infrared preflash and finally sets the camera lens to this aperture, all automatically. Ergo, your normal lens will be set by the flash from f/22 to f/2 depending on the distance of the subject—quite unlike standard dedicated flash units which make use of only a limited number of apertures and which require you to make pre-exposure tests if you want to make certain that you have enough illumination. With the 277T, the pre-test takes place immediately before exposure. If an aperture is selected and shows in the viewfinder (and on the back of the flash unit) the light is sufficient. If you are out of range, the maximum aperture of your lens will blink in the finder and a red dot will pulse on the back of the 277T after the preflash. However, you can make a flash pretest if you wish by pushing the exposure preview button. If the flash unit and camera registers a useable aperture number, you can go ahead and shoot. However, the flash's ability doesn’t stop at measuring an infrared flash distance. The front sensor measures ambient light at the same time so you can combine daylight or any other type of continuous light with electronic flash (provided of course the required shutter speed does not go over the maximum flash sync speed of 1 /90 sec.).

How simple and accurate is this flash system in practical use? We'll check it carefully in our practical tests.

The T70's back can be removed quickly and replaced with the Command Back 70. The back is so comprehensive that a complete description equally as long as our camera report could probably be written about it. Suffice it to say that it is incredibly slim, adding only 3.4mm, 13/e in. and Vfe oz. to the camera and comes complete with the same thumb grip surface as the regular camera back. (You do lose the film box reminder slot, however.) Besides being able to record data such as date, time, picture number or 6-digit code on ASA/ISO 25, 100 and 400 film, the back can also command the camera to take pictures at time delays up to 23 hr., 59 min. and 59 sec., take pictures at intervals of the same range, make time exposures over the same range and/or combine any of these functions in any sequence you wish. An excellent 42-page instruction book accompanies the back. Power for the back is supplied by a 3-volt lithium disc-type battery which needs replacement about every four years.

The T70's motorized film advance was surprisingly quiet as was its shutter operation. Our tests showed that an entire roll of 36 frames could be exposed in 31.75 sec. or faster than 1 frame per sec. At film end, audible beeping warned that the film should be rewound. Canon’s estimate of 40 rolls of film transported and rewound per set of batteries seemed slightly optimistic since camera advance did slow down as the batteries aged. We would advise battery replacement in 25-30 rolls—still an impressive number. Pressure on the rewind lever and button provided instant rewind completely into the cassette in 20 sec. We enjoyed watching the LCD panel indicate, in pictographs, the film rewinding and the frame counter counting downwards. When film is completely wound, the frame counter goes blank, the film leader in the picturegram disappears, the motor rewind stops and the pictograph of the cartridge itself begins to blink indicating that it should be removed. However, you can’t stop the film from rewinding completely into the cartridge.

The laser-matte screen provided an extraordinarily bright viewing and focusing screen with a splendid split-image rangefinder which, like the excellent surrounding microprism collar, remained useable from maximum aperture down to f/5.6 (with lenses having that maximum aperture). The entire screen can be seen by eyeglass wearers complete with the right-hand side viewfinder signals. Thanks to the unique rubber eyecup, viewing with eyeglasses was easier than with any other SLR except the Canon T50 which has the same eyecup.

While the cataloging of the T70 features is indeed awesome, there are a few features which are absent. There is no depth-of-field preview, no provision for multiple exposures, no PC terminal for standard off-camera flash cords, no interchangeable screen provision. We have noticed that more and more cameras are appearing without depth-of-field previews, a useful feature, in our opinion. However, the absence of a PC terminal can readily be rectified by those needing one by using a shoe PC terminal adapter available from many stores. As for interchangeable screens, such a feature is more in keeping with a professionally oriented camera which the T70 isn’t, being more in the role of a highly sophisticated camera for amateurs, advanced or otherwise.

In handling it would be nearly impossible to find a camera whose shape and placement of controls was better. The bulging, right-hand front finger grip and rear ribbed grip seem ideally suitable for almost everyone's hands. Loading operated properly 100% of the time. However, should you fail to pull the film leader across to the marked place and the film doesn’t wind, the pictograph on the LCD panel shows a cartridge with no leader sticking outwards. Auto winding to the first frame was very useful. The T70 exhibited a body solidity we hadn’t found in any new camera for years. Should you wish to use diopter correction lenses rather than your eyeglasses, the camera’s rubber eyecup must be removed. However, we do recommend that you use your eyeglasses and not the diopter correction lenses if you are farsighted since you will not be able to view the top LCD panel without your glasses.

The digital LED information in the finder was extremely bright and usable when shooting in darkened areas—an admirable superiority over most other SLRs—and the display remained visible even in fairly bright sunlight. The information on the top LCD panel was the essence of legibility. But the separation of information between the top LCD panel and the viewfinder itself did cause us some difficulty. In order to set shutter speeds in shutter-speed preferred mode or to check possible automatic shift from the set shutter speeds in case of too much light or too little, you must remove the camera from your eye and look at the top panel. Likewise, you can’t read the shutter speed set in any program mode without taking the camera from your eye. When you do remove the camera from your eye there is the danger that the reading on the panel won't be the same as when you are viewing the subject through the finder, with your eye up against the eyepiece.

We readily understand that all the information on the top LCD could not possibly be placed inside the finder area but we would have wished the shutter speeds could have been visible within it. The remainder of the information, useful largely during pre- or post-shooting (such as loading info, frame number, mode and type of program) could remain where it is.

We had expected to find becoming accustomed to the pushbutton and lever controls difficult since we have for so many years operated with dials and rings. But we quickly became adept at the new way of changing functions and settings. Whether you can accept the convenience of the pushbuttons and switch vs. the possible satisfaction of twisting dials and rings will remain a personal decision. As with all cameras completely powered by batteries, we should point out that once batteries poop out (or in the few cases where there would be an electrical malfunction), the camera does become completely inoperable. Should this happen or should you change batteries, you won’t lose valuable LCD panel information such as the frame counter number or film speed. The T70 has a camera-service-facility-replaceable, 5-year-life lithium battery located in a sealed chamber in the bottom of the camera.

Since it’s a completely electronic camera, you won’t find a standard mechanically-operated cable release socket on the T70. Instead it accepts a Remote Switch 60T3 which plugs into a three terminal switch on the T70’s hand grip. We have found such electrical releases to cause far less camera vibration than even the best mechanical cable releases.

Since the infrared preflash Canon 277T flash was introduced simultaneously with the T70 and appears frequently in T70 brochures and instruction booklets, would-be purchasers might wrongfully conclude that it is the only type of flash useable on the T70 and, conversely, that the 277 T can only operate on the T70. Neither assumption is correct. While the T70 can use the 277T or the simpler 244T introduced with the T50 last year, any regular Canon dedicated flash unit will operate on theT70, and the 277T can indeed work just as nicely and automatically on a host of other Canon's including the A-1, AE-1, F-1 and AE-1 Program.

However, since the 277T is a most interesting unit and has been coupled in literature with the T70, let’s see how it works.

The unit is a four-AA-cell flash with coverage for a 35mm lens. An accessory panel broadens the coverage to the 28mm field. We found that the 277T provides not only aperture selection before the actual picture is shot using its infrared pre-exposure flash, but the camera’s quenching circuit and silicon sensor then also measures the reflectivity of the subject and adjusts the duration of the flash during the exposure like most auto flash units. In Canon's dedicated flash system, a recycled flash unit not only shifts the camera’s shutter speed to the proper sync speed (in this case 1 /90 sec.) but also sets the proper aperture for the camera, indicating the aperture set in the viewfinder.

With ordinary dedicated flash units, (including Canon’s) only a few apertures are available which you must preset. But with the 277T there are 8 apertures from f/2 to f/22, from which the flash unit itself will select, so you will always get the best possible aperture to give you the most efficient flash and depth of field depending on the camera-to-subject distance. Conveniently, the aperture selected can be read right from the back of the flash even before the picture is made—an ingenious system. But should you wish to select your own aperture you can still use the 277T on the Canon T70 fully automatically. You just shift the control switch from Program to F No. Set mode, and push the F No. set aperture selector until the aperture you wish to use shows up as a bright red numeral on the back of the flash unit. In other words you can pre-select your aperture as on other auto flash dedicated units but you have a full set of 8 instead of a few. Now when you shoot a flash shot, the pre-exposure infrared flash will not go off since an aperture has already been chosen. Instead the unit will operate like a regular dedicated autoflash, adjusting its duration for proper exposure during the flash itself.

According to Canon's instructional booklet, the 277T provides a shooting range of from 1.6 to 41 ft. with an ASA 100 film, starting at f/22 closeup and using f/2 at maximum distance (there is no f/1.4 setting so the additional distance which an f/1.4 lens might give you isn't possible with the 277T).

How well do these systems work? We set up a controlled shooting range in the laboratory for Kodachrome 25. With the flash set to the program mode we made a series of photographs between 3.3 and 16.4 ft., the ASA 25 range as listed in the instruction book. But we wondered how well the relatively weak, pre-exposure infrared flash would work over long distances. We accordingly set up a 100 ft. range with tape measure and loaded the T70 with ASA 400 color slide film. According to the chart this might provide a range from 6.6 ft. at f/22 to 98.4 ft. at f/2. A series of photographs were made by Modern s technicians at 3 ft., 5 ft., 10 ft. and then at 10-ft. intervals to 100 ft. At 50 ft. the pre-exposure aperture was f/2.8 and this aperture remained out to 100 ft.

When we received our slides back we found that exposures from 3 ft. to 50 ft. were properly exposed. Even when we moved the single subject to the side where most flash sensors would miss the subject completely the 277T’s pre-exposure flash was able to pick up the right aperture. This is due to the unit’s sensor wide angular response, which is across the field rather than a narrow angle as in other flash units. But slides made at distances beyond 50 ft. were clearly underexposed. The long distance was apparently beyond the infrared flash sensing unit’s ability to measure accurately. We noticed that an ever so slight tilt upwards or downwards at long distances caused wide variations in the f/stop set. Apparently the reflections from the ground in the foreground itself prevented the unit from using apertures larger than f/2.8 when needed beyond 50 ft.

Our recommendation therefore would be to trust program mode exposure up to 50 ft. (35-40 if you want a safety margin) but to switch to F. No. Set for distances beyond that range. With the F. No. Set mode, you can select f/2 for maximum range. However, there is a fly in the flash unit ointment here. The unit has no flash range O.K. confirmation signal to let you know whether the exposure was sufficient. While there is a chart of ranges in the instruction book there isn't one on the flash unit itself. We feel the 277T is an excellent choice for moderate flash ranges in the program mode particularly since it can also be used automatically with existing light for flash fill-in, but if you intend to use fast film at very long distances—over 35 ft. or so, perhaps you should consider another type of dedicated flash unit with a flash confirmation signal.

The 277T also has no provision for bounce flash nor can it cover lenses wider in angle than 35mm, other reasons you might want a different flash unit. For quick, easy, direct flash operation at moderate distances however, you can't beat the efficiency and ease of the 277T.

We regret the longish recital of flash tests, but the T70 and the 277T are sufficiently interesting and the instructions insufficiently clear so additional testing and reporting were necessary.

In the T70, Canon has used electronics to the utmost, providing amateurs with the most flexibility and ruggedness possible. Is it more your cup of photo tea than say a Canon A-1 or AE-1 program? Opinions were just as divided at Modern as they will be among any group of photographers. The T70 is not a camera you pass with a shrug. It’s a big step into the future. It remains to be seen whether you want to take the big step along with it. Field test slides: Images from the well known 50mm f/1.4 Canon lens showed good center sharpness and snap at all apertures. There was a slight central loss of contrast at full aperture but it was only noticeable when compared to the middle aperture slides. Some loss of detail could be detected in the corners at large apertures but even the extreme corners held up well by f/4. Light falloff, apparent at f/1.4 was almost totally gone by f/2. Flare was well controlled throughout at all apertures. At close distances, images shot at apertures wider than f/2.8 showed some loss of detail but by f/2.8 they were crisp and snappy. We judged slides to be average or slightly above average for a fast normal lens.

Optical bench analysis (for optical experts only): On axis, slight uncorrected spherical aberration could be seen. Lens was diffraction limited by f/5.6. Slight red flare was present. Off axis, slight skew-ray and very slight yellow flare were observed. No lateral color was apparent. (July 1984)




