R3 - FURTHER COLLABORATION WITH MINOLTA

In volume terms, Leica was (and still is) tiny compared with the major Japanese manufacturers. It could not support alone the research and development or the tooling costs of a completely new electronic camera. Already it was collaborating with the Minolta company in a number of areas (including the lenses mentioned above and the Leica CL compact rangefinder system). Naturally enough the next Leica SLR, the R3 of 1976, drew heavily on this connection.

The highly regarded manual/aperture-priority auto Minolta XE1, introduced in 1975, already incorporated a shutter jointly developed by Leica and Copal - the CLS. Leica engineers now took the basic XE bodyshell, strengthened it in a number of places, built in their own mirror box and finder optics, added a spot metering mode similar to that of the SL2 to the XEl’s averaging system along with one or two other special features, and the R3 was born.

The R3 was an excellent camera combining the best of Japanese technology with Leica innovation, engineering skills and quality control standards. The spot metering mode, with a simple, convenient method of locking the reading by a second pressure on the shutter release, was classic and many experienced photographers realised just how effective and controllable auto exposure could be.

The first few R3s were assembled at Wetzlar but very quickly production was transferred to a new Leica plant in Portugal, which enabled significant cost reductions to be achieved. This was essential as the relative cost of other SLRs - even the high-quality ‘professional’ machines such as the Nikon F2 and Canon FI - had dropped considerably. Although Leica cameras never have sold on price it was essential not to get too out of touch with accepted price levels.

One of the difficulties that Leica had to face up to with the R3 was a change in the lens mount - or more precisely the meter coupling cams incorporated into it. In 1968, when the SL succeeded the original Leicaflex, a second cam had been introduced, and with the R3 a very simple but still essential third cam Had to be provided to index the lens maximum aperture. The subtleties of single, twin and triple camming are complex (see table, pl44) but it is true to say that Leica, with only one or two very rare exceptions, has made it possible to use even the very earliest ‘R’ lenses on its latest camera and vice versa.
