THE REALA THING

Fuji executives swear that Reala (pronounced Re-al-uh), their new super-rich color print film pegged for the advanced amateur and professional, is not an answer to Kodak's Ektar line, introduced back in October.

Hmm... each of the two premium-priced film brands claims to deliver color and sharpness hitherto unknown in print emulsions, both are distinct from their companies’ standard brands, both aim for the same discriminating market and both have rather outlandish, though highly memorable, names.

Of course, not even Fuji could cobble together a new film in three months; Reala, which features a remarkable fourth color emulsion layer and super-fine grain one-third the size of comparable film, must have been years in the making.

That the two film giants should release such innovative and competitive color films so close together indicates the fierce pitch of their mutual battle over market share and how seriously the film divisions of both companies are taking the ongoing challenge of non-film-based imaging systems. For if Reala and Ektar demonstrate one thing, it’s that Fuji and Kodak are really on the same side in the fight for the hearts and minds of the image-hungry public.

Reala is an ISO 100 film (there were no announced plans for other speeds), available in 35mm and 120 rolls. Fuji claims the film employs three new technologies for greater sharpness, improved color saturation and an enhanced sensitivity to purples, yeliows and reds. That greater sensitivity is a result of a fourth emulsion layer, blue-green sensitive, which, the company says, regulates the cyan production and enables Reala to mimic the color spectral response found in the human eye. What this means is that you can shoot Reala by fluorescent light and not get sick-green skin tones.

We’ll be giving the film a full test very soon, but our first shots taken with the film—one of which is shown here, along with a sample photo provided by Fuji—indicate that Reala is everything they say it is.

Both Fuji and Kodak are hoping pros latch on to their new film for magazine and advertising work that is now being shot on transparencies. The promise of fine grain, color accuracy, a wider exposure latitude than slide films and, in Reala’s case, 120 format availability, could win some discriminating believers, especially if enough pro labs gear up to give special service to the new films. Indeed, Reala's unique DXF coding system is in line with the next generation of Fuji mini-lab processors, which will be able to print the frame number on the back of every print from a DXF negative.

Along with Reala, Fuji has also introduced four other color print films: the brand new Fuji-color Super HG 200 and 400 and a second generation of improved HR emulsions, HRM100 and 1600. They replace Super HR 100, 200, 400 and 1600. The Super HG films use two of the three new Reala technologies for finer grain—the 200 is claimed to be comparable to earlier 100 films—and better saturation; but they are without the fourth blue-green sensitive color layer. Fuji says the HRII films have greater storage stability than the old HR films.

— JOE GIOIA AND DEBRA KON